<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="yes"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" dir="ltr"><head><meta charset="UTF-8"/><link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="main.css"/><title>Religious Affiliation and Social Stratification</title><style typeof="mw:Extension/templatestyles" about="#mwt1"><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-header-mainblock{margin:4px auto 4px auto;padding:0 3px;display:flex;align-items:center}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-back,.mw-parser-output .wst-header-forward{display:flex;flex:1 4 100%;min-width:min-content;align-items:center;font-size:.9em}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-nav-empty{visibility:hidden}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-back{justify-content:flex-start;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-central-cell{flex:4 1 100%;max-width:max-content;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-forward{justify-content:flex-end;text-align:right}@media(max-width:768px){.mw-parser-output .wst-header-mainblock{flex-wrap:wrap}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-central-cell{flex:0 0 100%;order:-2;width:auto}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-back,.mw-parser-output .wst-header-forward{width:auto}}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-notes{display:inline-block;border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;empty-cells:hide;font-size:.9em;line-height:1.4;margin:0 auto 4px auto;width:100%}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-left{float:left}@media screen{html.skin-theme-clientpref-night .mw-parser-output .wst-header-back-link a{color:inherit;text-decoration:underline dotted}}@media screen and (prefers-color-scheme:dark){html.skin-theme-clientpref-os .mw-parser-output .wst-header-back-link a{color:inherit;text-decoration:underline dotted}}]]></style><style><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-center{text-align:center;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .wst-center.wst-center-nomargin>p{margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0}]]></style><style><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-asc{font-variant:all-small-caps}.mw-parser-output .wst-asc-initials{white-space:nowrap}.mw-parser-output .wst-asc-initials>span:not(:first-child){padding-left:0.16em}.mw-parser-output .wst-asc-initials.wst-asc-initials-nospace>span:not(:first-child){padding-left:0}]]></style><style><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-ref:target{background-color:var(--background-color-progressive-subtle--active,#cbd6f6)}]]></style><style typeof="mw:Extension/templatestyles mw:Transclusion" about="#mwt6"><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-rule{background-color:currentcolor;color:inherit;width:auto;margin:2px auto 2px auto;height:1px;overflow:hidden}.mw-parser-output .wst-rule.wst-rule-left{margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .wst-rule.wst-rule-right{margin-right:0}.mw-parser-output .wst-rule.__uirule{background-color:#a2a9b1;color:inherit;border:0;margin-top:0.2em;margin-bottom:0.2em}]]></style><style typeof="mw:Extension/templatestyles mw:Transclusion" about="#mwt8"><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs{font-size:83%;clear:both;line-height:1.25;margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs ol.references{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs-ruled{border-top:1px solid;padding-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs ol.references.uksi{margin-top:0;list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs ol.references.uksi li::marker{font-weight:bold}]]></style></head><body class="mw-content-ltr sitedir-ltr ltr mw-body-content parsoid-body mediawiki mw-parser-output" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" xml:lang="en"><section data-mw-section-id="0">
<p><span style="display:none" id="dynamic_layout_overrider-n70" about="#mwt4" typeof="mw:Transclusion">Layout 2</span></p>
<div class="prp-pages-output" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt5" xml:lang="en">
<span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-35" data-page-number="35" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/55" data-page-index="55" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/55"/></span><div class="wst-center tiInherit">
<p><span class="wst-asc"><span style="letter-spacing:0.15em;">CHAPTER I</span></span>
</p><p><span style="font-size:120%;">RELIGIOUS AFFILIATION AND SOCIAL STRATIFICATION<sup id="ref_1-n72" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_1">[1]</a></sup></span>
</p>
</div>
<p><span class="smallcaps" style="font-variant:small-caps;">A glance</span> at the occupational statistics of any country of mixed religious composition brings to light with remarkable frequency<sup id="ref_2-n73" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_2">[2]</a></sup> a situation which has several times provoked discussion in the Catholic press and literature,<sup id="ref_3-n74" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_3">[3]</a></sup> and in Catholic congresses in Germany, namely, the fact that business leaders and owners of capital, as well as the higher grades of skilled labour, and even more the higher technically and commercially trained personnel of modern enterprises, are overwhelmingly Protestant.<sup id="ref_4-n75" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_4">[4]</a></sup> This is true not only in cases where the difference in religion coincides with one of nationality, and thus of cultural development, as in Eastern Germany between Germans and Poles. The same thing is shown in the figures of religious affiliation almost wherever capitalism, at the time of its great expansion, has had a free hand to alter the social distribution of the population in accordance with its needs, and to determine its occupational structure. The more freedom it has had, the more clearly is the effect shown. It is true that the greater relative participation of Protestants in the ownership of capital,<sup id="ref_5-n76" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_5">[5]</a></sup> in management, and the upper ranks of labour in great modern industrial and commercial enterprises,<sup id="ref_6-n77" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_6">[6]</a></sup> may in part be explained in terms of historical circumstances<sup id="ref_7-n78" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_7">[7]</a></sup> which extend far back into the past, and in which religious affiliation is not a cause of the economic conditions, but to a certain extent appears to be a result <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-36" data-page-number="36" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/56" data-page-index="56" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/56"/></span>of them. Participation in the above economic function usually involves some previous ownership of capital and generally an expensive education; often both. These are to-day largely dependent on the possession of inherited wealth, or at least on a certain degree of material well-being. A number of those sections of the old Empire which were most highly developed economically and most favoured by natural resources and situation, in particular a majority of the wealthy towns, went over to Protestantism in the sixteenth century. The results of that circumstance favour the Protestants even to-day in their struggle for economic existence. There arises thus the historical question: why were the districts of highest economic development at the same time particularly favourable to a revolution in the Church? The answer is by no means so simple as one might think.
</p><p>The emancipation from economic traditionalism appears, no doubt, to be a factor which would greatly strengthen the tendency to doubt the sanctity of the religious tradition, as of all traditional authorities. But it is necessary to note, what has often been forgotten, that the Reformation meant not the elimination of the Church's control over everyday life, but rather the substitution of a new form of control for the previous one. It meant the repudiation of a control which was very lax, at that time scarcely perceptible in practice, and hardly more than formal, in favour of a regulation of the whole of conduct which, penetrating to all departments of private and public life, was infinitely burdensome and earnestly enforced. The rule of the Catholic Church, "punishing the heretic, but indulgent <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-37" data-page-number="37" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/57" data-page-index="57" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/57"/></span>to the sinner", as it was in the past even more than to-day, is now tolerated by peoples of thoroughly modern economic character, and was borne by the richest and economically most advanced peoples on earth at about the turn of the fifteenth century. The rule of Calvinism, on the other hand, as it was enforced in the sixteenth century in Geneva and in Scotland, at the turn of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in large parts of the Netherlands, in the seventeenth in New England, and for a time in England itself, would be for us the most absolutely unbearable form of ecclesiastical control of the individual which could possibly exist. That was exactly what large numbers of the old commercial aristocracy of those times, in Geneva as well as in Holland and England, felt about it. And what the reformers complained of in those areas of high economic development was not too much supervision of life on the part of the Church, but too little. Now how does it happen that at that time those countries which were most advanced economically, and within them the rising bourgeois middle classes, not only failed to resist this unexampled tyranny of Puritanism, but even developed a heroism in its defence? For bourgeois classes as such have seldom before and never since displayed heroism. It was "the last of our heroisms", as Carlyle, not without reason, has said.
</p><p>But further, and especially important: it may be, as has been claimed, that the greater participation Protestants in the positions of ownership and management in modern economic life may to-day be understood, in part at least, simply as a result of the greater material wealth they have inherited. But there are <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-38" data-page-number="38" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/58" data-page-index="58" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/58"/></span>certain other phenomena which cannot be explained in the same way. Thus, to mention only a few facts: there is a great difference discoverable in Baden, in Bavaria, in Hungary, in the type of higher education which Catholic parents, as opposed to Protestant, give their children. That the percentage of Catholics among the students and graduates of higher educational institutions in general lags behind their proportion of the total population,<sup id="ref_8-n82" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_8">[8]</a></sup> may, to be sure, be largely explicable in terms of inherited differences of wealth. But among the Catholic graduates themselves the percentage of those graduating from the institutions preparing, in particular, for technical studies and industrial and commercial occupations, but in general from those preparing for middle-class business life, lags still farther behind the percentage of Protestants.<sup id="ref_9-n83" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_9">[9]</a></sup> On the other hand, Catholics prefer the sort of training which the humanistic Gymnasium affords. That is a circumstance to which the above explanation does not apply, but which, on the contrary, is one reason why so few Catholics are engaged in capitalistic enterprise.
</p><p>Even more striking is a fact which partly explains the smaller proportion of Catholics among the skilled labourers of modern industry. It is well known that the factory has taken its skilled labour to a large extent from young men in the handicrafts; but this is much more true of Protestant than of Catholic journeymen. Among journeymen, in other words, the Catholics show a stronger propensity to remain in their crafts, that is they more often become master craftsmen, whereas the Protestants are attracted to a larger extent into the factories in order to fill the upper ranks of <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-39" data-page-number="39" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/59" data-page-index="59" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/59"/></span>skilled labour and administrative positions.<sup id="ref_10-n85" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_10">[10]</a></sup> The explanation of these cases is undoubtedly that the mental and spiritual peculiarities acquired from the environment, here the type of education favoured by the religious atmosphere of the home community and the parental home, have determined the choice of occupation, and through the professional career.
</p><p>The smaller participation of Catholics in the modern business life of Germany is all the more striking because it runs counter to a tendency which has been observed at all times<sup id="ref_11-n86" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_11">[11]</a></sup> including the present. National or religious minorities which are in a position of subordination to a group of rulers are likely, through their voluntary or involuntary exclusion from positions of political influence, to be driven with peculiar force into economic activity. Their ablest members seek to satisfy the desire for recognition of their abilities in this field, since there is no opportunity in the service of the State. This has undoubtedly been true of the Poles in Russia and Eastern Prussia, who have without question been undergoing a more rapid economic advance than in Galicia, where they have been in the ascendant. It has in earlier times been true of the Huguenots in France under Louis XIV, the Nonconformists and Quakers in England, and, last but not least, the Jew for two thousand years. But the Catholics in Germany have shown no striking evidence of such a result of their position. In the past they have, unlike the Protestants, undergone no particularly prominent economic development in the times when they were persecuted or only tolerated, either in Holland or in England. On the other hand, it is a fact that the Protestants (especi<span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-40" data-page-number="40" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/60" data-page-index="60" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/60"/></span>ally certain branches of the movement to be fully discussed later) both as ruling classes and as ruled, both as majority and as minority, have shown a special tendency to develop economic rationalism which cannot be observed to the same extent among Catholics either in the one situation or in the other.<sup id="ref_12-n88" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_12">[12]</a></sup> Thus the principal explanation of this difference must be sought in the permanent intrinsic character of their religious beliefs, and not only in their temporary external historico-political situations.<sup id="ref_13" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_13">[13]</a></sup>
</p><p>It will be our task to investigate these religions with a view to finding out what peculiarities they have or have had which might have resulted in the behaviour we have described. On superficial analysis, and on the basis of certain current impressions, one might be tempted to express the difference by saying that the greater other-worldliness of Catholicism, the ascetic character of its highest ideals, must have brought up its adherents to a greater indifference toward the good things of this world. Such an explanation fits the popular tendency in the judgment of both religions. On the Protestant side it is used as a basis of criticism of those (real or imagined) ascetic ideals of the Catholic way of life, while the Catholics answer with the accusation that materialism results from the secularization of all ideals through Protestantism. One recent writer has attempted to formulate the difference of their attitudes toward economic life in the following manner: "The Catholic is quieter, having less of the acquisitive impulse; he prefers a life of the greatest possible security, even with a smaller income, to a life of risk and excitement, even though it may bring the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-41" data-page-number="41" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/61" data-page-index="61" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/61"/></span>chance of gaining honour and riches. The proverb says jokingly, 'either eat well or sleep well'. In the present case the Protestant prefers to eat well, the Catholic to sleep undisturbed."<sup id="ref_14" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_14">[14]</a></sup>
</p><p>In fact, this desire to eat well may be a correct though incomplete characterization of the motives of many nominal Protestants in Germany at the present time. But things were very different in the past: the English, Dutch, and American Puritans were characterized by the exact opposite of the joy of living, a fact which is indeed, as we shall see, most important for our present study. Moreover, the French Protestants, among others, long retained, and retain to a certain extent up to the present, the characteristics which were impressed upon the Calvinistic Churches everywhere, especially under the cross in the time of the religious struggles. Nevertheless (or was it, perhaps, as we shall ask later, precisely on that account?) it is well known that these characteristics were one of the most important factors in the industrial and capitalistic development of France, and on the small scale permitted them by their persecution remained so. If we may call this seriousness and the strong predominance of religious interests in the whole conduct of life otherworldliness, then the French Calvinists were and still are at least as otherworldly as, for instance, the North German Catholics, to whom their Catholicism is undoubtedly as vital a matter as religion is to any other people in the world. Both differ from the predominant religious trends in their respective countries in much the same way. The Catholics of France are, in their lower ranks, greatly interested in the enjoyment of life, <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-42" data-page-number="42" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/62" data-page-index="62" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/62"/></span>in the upper directly hostile to religion. Similarly, the Protestants of Germany are to-day absorbed in worldly economic life, and their upper ranks are most indifferent to religion.<sup id="ref_15" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_15">[15]</a></sup> Hardly anything shows so clearly as this parallel that, with such vague ideas as that of the alleged otherworldliness of Catholicism, and the alleged materialistic joy of living of Protestantism, and others like them, nothing can be accomplished for our purpose. In such general terms the distinction does not even adequately fit the facts of to-day, and certainly not of the past. If, however, one wishes to make use of it at all, several other observations present themselves at once which, combined with the above remarks, suggest that the supposed conflict between other-worldliness, asceticism, and ecclesiastical piety on the one side, and participation in capitalistic acquisition on the other, might actually turn out to be an intimate relationship.
</p><p>As a matter of fact it is surely remarkable, to begin with quite a superficial observation, how large is the number of representatives of the most spiritual forms of Christian piety who have sprung from commercial circles. In particular, very many of the most zealous adherents of Pietism are of this origin. It might be explained as a sort of reaction against mammonism on the part of sensitive natures not adapted to commercial life, and, as in the case of Francis of Assisi, many Pietists have themselves interpreted the process of their conversion in these terms. Similarly, the remarkable circumstance that so many of the greatest capitalistic entrepreneurs—down to Cecil Rhodes—have come from clergymen's families might be explained as a reaction against their ascetic upbringing. But this <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-43" data-page-number="43" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/63" data-page-index="63" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/63"/></span>form of explanation fails where an extraordinary capitalistic business sense is combined in the same persons and groups with the most intensive forms of a piety which penetrates and dominates their whole lives. Such cases are not isolated, but these traits are characteristic of many of the most important Churches and sects in the history of Protestantism. Especially Calvinism, wherever it has appeared,<sup id="ref_16" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_16">[16]</a></sup> has shown this combination. However little, in the time of the expansion of the Reformation, it (or any other Protestant belief) was bound up with any particular social class, it is characteristic and in a certain sense typical that in French Huguenot Churches monks and business men (merchants, craftsmen) were particularly numerous among the proselytes, especially at the time of the persecution.<sup id="ref_17" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_17">[17]</a></sup> Even the Spaniards knew that heresy (i.e. the Calvinism of the Dutch) promoted trade, and this coincides with the opinions which Sir William Petty expressed in his discussion of the reasons for the capitalistic development of the Netherlands. Gothein<sup id="ref_18" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_18">[18]</a></sup> rightly calls the Calvinistic diaspora the seed-bed of capitalistic economy.<sup id="ref_19" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_19">[19]</a></sup> Even in this case one might consider the decisive factor to be the superiority of the French and Dutch economic cultures from which these communities sprang, or perhaps the immense influence of exile in the breakdown of traditional relationships.<sup id="ref_20" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_20">[20]</a></sup> But in France the situation was, as we know from Colbert's struggles, the same even in the seventeenth century. Even Austria, not to speak of other countries, directly imported Protestant craftsmen.
</p><p>But not all the Protestant denominations seem to have had an equally strong influence in this direction. <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-44" data-page-number="44" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/64" data-page-index="64" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/64"/></span>That of Calvinism, even in Germany, was among the strongest, it seems, and the reformed faith<sup id="ref_21" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_21">[21]</a></sup> more than the others seems to have promoted the development of the spirit of capitalism, in the Wupperthal as well as elsewhere. Much more so than Lutheranism, as comparison both in general and in particular instances, especially in the Wupperthal, seems to prove.<sup id="ref_22" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_22">[22]</a></sup> For Scotland, Buckle, and among English poets, Keats, have emphasized these same relationships.<sup id="ref_23" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_23">[23]</a></sup> Even more striking, as it is only necessary to mention, is the connection of a religious way of life with the most intensive development of business acumen among those sects whose otherworldliness is as proverbial as their wealth, especially the Quakers and the Mennonites. The part which the former have played in England and North America fell to the latter in Germany and the Netherlands. That in East Prussia Frederick William I tolerated the Mennonites as indispensable to industry, in spite of their absolute refusal to perform military service, is only one of the numerous well-known cases which illustrates the fact, though, considering the character of that monarch, it is one of the most striking. Finally, that this combination of intense piety with just as strong a development of business acumen, was also characteristic of the Pietists, is common knowledge.<sup id="ref_24" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_24">[24]</a></sup>
</p><p>It is only necessary to think of the Rhine country and of Calw. In this purely introductory discussion it is unnecessary to pile up more examples. For these few already all show one thing: that the spirit of hard work, of progress, or whatever else it may be called, the awakening of which one is inclined to ascribe to <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-45" data-page-number="45" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/65" data-page-index="65" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/65"/></span>Protestantism, must not be understood, as there is a tendency to do, as joy of living nor in any other sense as connected with the Enlightenment. The old Protestantism of Luther, Calvin, Knox, Voet, had precious little to do with what to-day is called progress. To whole aspects of modern life which the most extreme religionist would not wish to suppress to-day, it was directly hostile. If any inner relationship between certain expressions of the old Protestant spirit and modern capitalistic culture is to be found, we must attempt to find it, for better or worse, not in its alleged more or less materialistic or at least anti-ascetic joy of living, but in its purely religious characteristics. Montesquieu says (<i>Esprit des Lois</i>, Book XX, chap. 7) of the English that they "had progressed the farthest of all peoples of the world in three important things: in piety, in commerce, and in freedom". Is it not possible that their commercial superiority and their adaptation to free political institutions are connected in someway with that record of piety which Montesquieu ascribes to them?
</p><p>A large number of possible relationships, vaguely perceived, occur to us when we put the question in this way. It will now be our task to formulate what occurs to us confusedly as clearly as is possible, considering the inexhaustible diversity to be found in all historical material. But in order to do this it is necessary to leave behind the vague and general concepts with which we have dealt up to this point, and attempt to penetrate into the peculiar characteristics of and the differences between those great worlds of religious thought which have existed historically in the various branches of Christianity.
</p>
<div class="__nop wst-nop"/>
<p> <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-46" data-page-number="46" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/66" data-page-index="66" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/66"/></span>Before we can proceed to that, however, a few remarks are necessary, first on the peculiarities of the phenomenon of which we are seeking an historical explanation, then concerning the sense in which such an explanation is possible at all within the limits of these investigations.
</p>
<div class="__nop wst-nop"/>

</div>
<hr class="wst-rule wst-rule-center " style="color:inherit;" about="#mwt6"/><span about="#mwt8">
</span><div class="prp-pages-output" about="#mwt8"><div class="reflist wst-smallrefs  " style="  ">
<ol class="mw-references references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt10"/>
</div>
</div></section></body></html>
