<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: Luther's Conception of the Calling. Task of the Investigation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:nonfiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Luther's Conception of the Calling. Task of the Investigation</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Now it is unmistakable that even in the German word <i>Beruf</i>, and perhaps still more clearly in the English <i>calling</i>, a religious conception, that of a task set by God, is at least suggested. The more emphasis is put upon the word in a concrete case, the more evident is the connotation. And if we trace the history of the word through the civilized languages, it appears that neither the predominantly Catholic peoples nor those of classical antiquity<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_1-n173"><a href="#endnote_1">[1]</a></sup> have possessed any expression of similar connotation for what we know as a calling (in the sense of a life-task, a definite field in which to work), while one has existed for all predominantly Protestant peoples. It may be further shown that this is not due to any ethnical peculiarity of the languages concerned. It is not, for instance, the product of a Germanic spirit, but in its modern meaning the word comes from the Bible translations, through the spirit of the translator, not that of the original.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_2-n174"><a href="#endnote_2">[2]</a></sup> In Luther's translation of the Bible it appears to have first been used at a point in Jesus Sirach (xi. 20 and 21) precisely in our modern sense.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_3-n175"><a href="#endnote_3">[3]</a></sup> After that it speedily took on its present meaning in the everyday speech of all Protestant peoples, while earlier not even a suggestion of such a meaning could be found in the secular literature of any of them, and even, in religious writings, so far as I can ascertain, it is only found in one of the German <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="100" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/100" data-page-number="80" data-page-quality="3" id="id-80" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/100"/></span>mystics whose influence on Luther is well known.</p>
			<p>Like the meaning of the word, the idea is new, a product of the Reformation. This may be assumed as generally known. It is true that certain suggestions of the positive valuation of routine activity in the world, which is contained in this conception of the calling, had already existed in the Middle Ages, and even in late Hellenistic antiquity. We shall speak of that later. But at least one thing was unquestionably new: the valuation of the fulfilment of duty in worldly affairs as the highest form which the moral activity of the individual could assume. This it was which inevitably gave every-day worldly activity a religious significance, and which first created the conception of a calling in this sense. The conception of the calling thus brings out that central dogma of all Protestant denominations which the Catholic division of ethical precepts into <i>præcepta</i> and <i>consilia</i> discards. The only way of living acceptably to God was not to surpass worldly morality in monastic asceticism, but solely through the fulfilment of the obligations imposed upon the individual by his position in the world. That was his calling.</p>
			<p>Luther<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_4-n177"><a href="#endnote_4">[4]</a></sup> developed the conception in the course of the first decade of his activity as a reformer. At first, quite in harmony with the prevailing tradition of the Middle Ages, as represented, for example, by Thomas Aquinas,<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_5-n178"><a href="#endnote_5">[5]</a></sup> he thought of activity in the world as a thing of the flesh, even though willed by God. It is the indispensable natural condition of a life of faith, but in itself, like eating and drinking, morally neutral. But with the development of the conception of <i>sola fide</i> in all its consequences, and its logical result, the increas<span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="101" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/101" data-page-number="81" data-page-quality="3" id="id-81" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/101"/></span>ingly sharp emphasis against the Catholic <i>consilia evangelica</i> of the monks as dictates of the devil, the calling grew in importance. The monastic life is not only quite devoid of value as a means of justification before God, but he also looks upon its renunciation of the duties of this world as the product of selfishness, withdrawing from temporal obligations. In contrast, labour in a calling appears to him as the outward expression of brotherly love. This he proves by the observation that the division of labour forces every individual to work for others, but his view-point is highly naïve, forming an almost grotesque contrast to Adam Smith's well-known statements on the same subject.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_7-n180"><a href="#endnote_7">[7]</a></sup> However, this justification, which is evidently essentially scholastic, soon disappears again, and there remains, more and more strongly emphasized, the statement that the fulfilment of worldly duties is under all circumstances the only way to live acceptably to God. It and it alone is the will of God, and hence every legitimate calling has exactly the same worth in the sight of God.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_8-n181"><a href="#endnote_8">[8]</a></sup></p>
			<p>That this moral justification of worldly activity was one of the most important results of the Reformation, especially of Luther's part in it, is beyond doubt, and may even be considered a platitude.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_9-n182"><a href="#endnote_9">[9]</a></sup> This attitude is worlds removed from the deep hatred of Pascal, in his contemplative moods, for all worldly activity, which he was deeply convinced could only be understood in terms of vanity or low cunning.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_10-n183"><a href="#endnote_10">[10]</a></sup> And it differs even more from the liberal utilitarian compromise with the world at which the Jesuits arrived. But just what the practical significance of this achievement of Protestantism was in detail is dimly felt rather than clearly perceived. <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="102" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/102" data-page-number="82" data-page-quality="3" id="id-82" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/102"/></span>In the first place it is hardly necessary to point out that Luther cannot be claimed for the spirit of capitalism in the sense in which we have used that term above, or for that matter in any sense whatever. The religious circles which to-day most enthusiastically celebrate that great achievement of the Reformation are by no means friendly to capitalism in any sense. And Luther himself would, without doubt, have sharply repudiated any connection with a point of view like that of Franklin. Of course, one cannot consider his complaints against the great merchants of his time, such as the Fuggers,<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_11-n185"><a href="#endnote_11">[11]</a></sup> as evidence in this case. For the struggle against the privileged position, legal or actual, of single great trading companies in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries may best be compared with the modern campaign against the trusts, and can no more justly be considered in itself an expression of a traditionalistic point of view. Against these people, against the Lombards, the monopolists, speculators, and bankers patronized by the Anglican Church and the kings and parliaments of England and France, both the Puritans and the Huguenots carried on a bitter struggle.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_12-n186"><a href="#endnote_12">[12]</a></sup> Cromwell, after the battle of Dunbar (September 1650), wrote to the Long Parliament: "Be pleased to reform the abuses of all professions: and if there be any one that makes many poor to make a few rich, that suits not a Commonwealth." But, nevertheless, we will find Cromwell following a quite specifically capitalistic line of thought.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_13-n187"><a href="#endnote_13">[13]</a></sup> On the other hand, Luther's numerous statements against usury or interest in any form reveal a conception of the nature of capitalistic acquisition which, compared with that of <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="103" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/103" data-page-number="83" data-page-quality="3" id="id-83" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/103"/></span>late Scholasticism, is, from a capitalistic view-point, definitely backward.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_14-n189"><a href="#endnote_14">[14]</a></sup> Especially, of course, the doctrine of the sterility of money which Anthony of Florence had already refuted.</p>
			<p>But it is unnecessary to go into detail. For, above all, the consequences of the conception of the calling in the religious sense for worldly conduct were susceptible to quite different interpretations. The effect of the Reformation as such was only that, as compared with the Catholic attitude, the moral emphasis on and the religious sanction of, organized worldly labour in a calling was mightily increased. The way in which the concept of the calling, which expressed this change, should develop further depended upon the religious evolution which now took place in the different Protestant Churches. The authority of the Bible, from which Luther thought he had derived his idea of the calling, on the whole favoured a traditionalistic interpretation. The old Testament, in particular, though in the genuine prophets it showed no sign of a tendency to excel worldly morality, and elsewhere only in quite isolated rudiments and suggestions, contained a similar religious idea entirely in this traditionalistic sense. Everyone should abide by his living and let the godless run after gain. That is the sense of all the statements which bear directly on worldly activities. Not until the Talmud is a partially, but not even then fundamentally, different attitude to be found. The personal attitude of Jesus is characterized in classical purity by the typical antique-Oriental plea: "Give us this day our daily bread." The element of radical repudiation of the world, as expressed in the μαμωνᾶς τῆς ἀδικίας, <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="104" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/104" data-page-number="84" data-page-quality="3" id="id-84" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/104"/></span>excluded the possibility that the modern idea of a calling should be based on his personal authority.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_15-n191"><a href="#endnote_15">[15]</a></sup> In the apostolic era as expressed in the New Testament, especially in St. Paul, the Christian looked upon worldly activity either with indifference, or at least essentially traditionalistically; for those first generations were filled with eschatological hopes. Since everyone was simply waiting for the coming of the Lord, there was nothing to do but remain in the station and in the worldly occupation in which the call of the Lord had found him, and labour as before. Thus he would not burden his brothers as an object of charity, and it would only be for a little while. Luther read the Bible through the spectacles of his whole attitude; at the time and in the course of his development from about 1518 to 1530 this not only remained traditionalistic but became ever more so.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_16-n192"><a href="#endnote_16">[16]</a></sup></p>
			<p>In the first years of his activity as a reformer he was, since he thought of the calling as primarily of the flesh, dominated by an attitude closely related, in so far as the form of world<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_17-n193"><a href="#endnote_17">[17]</a></sup> activity was concerned, to the Pauline eschatological indifference as expressed in 1 Cor. vii.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_17">[17]</a></sup> One may attain salvation in any walk of life; on the short pilgrimage of life there is no use in laying weight on the form of occupation. The pursuit of material gain beyond personal needs must thus appear as a symptom of lack of grace, and since it can apparently only be attained at the expense of others, directly reprehensible.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_18-n194"><a href="#endnote_18">[18]</a></sup> As he became increasingly involved in the affairs of the world, he came to value work in the world more highly. But in the concrete calling an individual pursued he saw more and more a special command of God to <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="105" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/105" data-page-number="85" data-page-quality="3" id="id-85" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/105"/></span>fulfil these particular duties which the Divine Will had imposed upon him. And after the conflict with the Fanatics and the peasant disturbances, the objective historical order of things in which the individual has been placed by God becomes for Luther more and more a direct manifestation of divine will.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_19-n196"><a href="#endnote_19">[19]</a></sup> The stronger and stronger emphasis on the providential element, even in particular events of life, led more and more to a traditionalistic interpretation based on the idea of Providence. The individual should remain once and for all in the station and calling in which God had placed him, and should restrain his worldly activity within the limits imposed by his established station in life. While his economic traditionalism was originally the result of Pauline indifference, it later became that of a more and more intense belief in divine providence,<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_20-n197"><a href="#endnote_20">[20]</a></sup> which identified absolute obedience to God's will,<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_21-n198"><a href="#endnote_21">[21]</a></sup> with absolute acceptance of things as they were. Starting from this background, it was impossible for Luther to establish a new or in any way fundamental connection between worldly activity and religious principles.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_22-n199"><a href="#endnote_22">[22]</a></sup> His acceptance of purity of doctrine as the one infallible criterion of the Church, which became more and more irrevocable after the struggles of the 'twenties, was in itself sufficient to check the development of new points of view in ethical matters.</p>
			<p>Thus for Luther the concept of the calling remained traditionalistic.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_23-n200"><a href="#endnote_23">[23]</a></sup> His calling is something which man has to accept as a divine ordinance, to which he must adapt himself. This aspect outweighed the other idea which was also present, that work in the calling was a, or rather <i>the</i>, task set by God.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_24-n201"><a href="#endnote_24">[24]</a></sup> And in its further <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="106" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/106" data-page-number="86" data-page-quality="3" id="id-86" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/106"/></span>development, orthodox Lutheranism emphasized this aspect still more. Thus, for the time being, the only ethical result was negative; worldly duties were no longer subordinated to ascetic ones; obedience to authority and the acceptance of things as they were, were preached.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_25-n203"><a href="#endnote_25">[25]</a></sup> In this Lutheran form the idea of a calling had, as will be shown in our discussion of mediæval religious ethics, to a considerable extent been anticipated by the German mystics. Especially in Tauler's equalization of the values of religious and worldly occupations, and the decline in valuation of the traditional forms of ascetic practices<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_26-n204"><a href="#endnote_26">[26]</a></sup> on account of the decisive significance of the ecstatic-contemplative absorption of the divine spirit by the soul. To a certain extent Lutheranism means a step backward from the mystics, in so far as Luther, and still more his Church, had, as compared with the mystics, partly undermined the psychological foundations for a rational ethics. (The mystic attitude on this point is reminiscent partly of the Pietest and partly of the Quaker psychology of faith.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_27-n205"><a href="#endnote_27">[27]</a></sup>) That was precisely because he could not but suspect the tendency to ascetic self-discipline of leading to salvation by works, and hence he and his Church were forced to keep it more and more in the background.</p>
			<p>Thus the mere idea of the calling in the Lutheran sense is at best of questionable importance for the problems in which we are interested. This was all that was meant to be determined here.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_28-n206"><a href="#endnote_28">[28]</a></sup> But this is not in the least to say that even the Lutheran form of the renewal of the religious life may not have had some practical significance for the objects of our investigation; quite the contrary. Only that significance evidently <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="107" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/107" data-page-number="87" data-page-quality="3" id="id-87" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/107"/></span>cannot be derived directly from the attitude of Luther and his Church to worldly activity, and is perhaps not altogether so easily grasped as the connection with other branches of Protestantism. It is thus well for us next to look into those forms in which a relation between practical life and a religious motivation can be more easily perceived than in Lutheranism. We have already called attention to the conspicuous part played by Calvinism and the Protestant sects in the history of capitalistic development. As Luther found a different spirit at work in Zwingli than in himself, so did his spiritual successors in Calvinism. And Catholicism has to the present day looked upon Calvinism as its real opponent.</p>
			<p>Now that may be partly explained on purely political grounds. Although the Reformation is unthinkable without Luther's own personal religious development, and was spiritually long influenced by his personality, without Calvinism his work could not have had permanent concrete success. Nevertheless, the reason for this common repugnance of Catholics and Lutherans lies, at least partly, in the ethical peculiarities of Calvinism. A purely superficial glance shows that there is here quite a different relationship between the religious life and earthly activity than in either Catholicism or Lutheranism. Even in literature motivated purely by religious factors that is evident. Take for instance the end of the <i><a class="mw-disambig" href="https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Divine_Comedy" title="Divine Comedy">Divine Comedy</a></i>, where the poet in Paradise stands speechless in his passive contemplation of the secrets of God, and compare it with the poem which has come to be called the <i>Divine Comedy of Puritanism</i>. Milton closes the last song of <i>Paradise</i> <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="108" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/108" data-page-number="88" data-page-quality="3" id="id-88" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/108"/></span><i>Lost</i> after describing the <i>expulsion</i> from paradise as follows:—</p>
			<div class="wst-fine wst-fine-block wst-size-block">
				<div class="ws-poem ws-poem-hi">
					<div class="ws-poem-stanza" role="paragraph">
						<span class="ws-poem-line">"They, looking back, all the eastern side beheld<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">Of paradise, so late their happy seat,<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">Waved over by that flaming brand; the gate<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">With dreadful faces thronged and fiery arms.<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon:<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">The world was all before them, there to choose<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">Their place of rest, and Providence their guide."<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-break">
							<br/>
						</span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>And only a little before Michael had said to Adam:</p>
			<div class="wst-fine wst-fine-block wst-size-block">
				<div class="ws-poem ws-poem-hi">
					<div class="ws-poem-stanza" role="paragraph">
						<span class="ws-poem-line"><span class="ws-poem-indent" style="width:12em">            </span>. . . "Only add<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">Deeds to thy knowledge answerable; add faith;<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">Add virtue, patience, temperance; add love,<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">By name to come called Charity, the soul<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loth<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">To leave this Paradise, but shall possess<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-line">A Paradise within thee, happier far."<span class="ws-poem-break"><br/></span></span>
						<span class="ws-poem-break">
							<br/>
						</span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>One feels at once that this powerful expression of the Puritan's serious attention to this world, his acceptance of his life in the world as a task, could not possibly have come from the pen of a mediæval writer. But it is just as uncongenial to Lutheranism, as expressed for instance in Luther's and Paul Gerhard's chorales. It is now our task to replace this vague feeling by a somewhat more precise logical formulation, and to investigate the fundamental basis of these differences. The appeal to national character is generally a mere confession of ignorance, and in this case it is entirely untenable. To ascribe a unified national character to the Englishmen of the seventeenth century would be simply to falsify history. Cavaliers and Roundheads did <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="109" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/109" data-page-number="89" data-page-quality="3" id="id-89" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/109"/></span>not appeal to each other simply as two parties, but as radically distinct species of men, and whoever looks into the matter carefully must agree with them.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_29-n210"><a href="#endnote_29">[29]</a></sup> On the other hand, a difference of character between the English merchant adventurers and the old Hanseatic merchants is not to be found; nor can any other fundamental difference between the English and German characters at the end of the Middle Ages, which cannot easily be explained by the differences of their political history.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_30-n211"><a href="#endnote_30">[30]</a></sup> It was the power of religious influence, not alone, but more than anything else, which created the differences of which we are conscious to-day.<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_31-n212"><a href="#endnote_31">[31]</a></sup></p>
			<p>We thus take as our starting-point in the investigation of the relationship between the old Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism the works of Calvin, of Calvinism, and the other Puritan sects. But it is not to be understood that we expect to find any of the founders or representatives of these religious movements considering the promotion of what we have called the spirit of capitalism as in any sense the end of his life-work. We cannot well maintain that the pursuit of worldly goods, conceived as an end in itself, was to any of them of positive ethical value. Once and for all it must be remembered that programmes of ethical reform never were at the centre of interest for any of the religious reformers (among whom, for our purposes, we must include men like Menno, George Fox, and Wesley). They were not the founders of societies for ethical culture nor the proponents of humanitarian projects for social reform or cultural ideals. The salvation of the soul and that alone was the centre of their <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="110" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/110" data-page-number="90" data-page-quality="3" id="id-90" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/110"/></span>life and work. Their ethical ideals and the practical results of their doctrines were all based on that alone, and were the consequences of purely religious motives. We shall thus have to admit that the cultural consequences of the Reformation were to a great extent, perhaps in the particular aspects with which we are dealing predominantly, unforeseen and even unwished for results of the labours of the reformers. They were often far removed from or even in contradiction to all that they themselves thought to attain.</p>
			<p>The following study may thus perhaps in a modest way form a contribution to the understanding of the manner in which ideas become effective forces in history. In order, however, to avoid any misunderstanding of the sense in which any such effectiveness of purely ideal motives is claimed at all, I may perhaps be permitted a few remarks in conclusion to this introductory discussion.</p>
			<p>In such a study, it may at once be definitely stated, no attempt is made to evaluate the ideas of the Reformation in any sense, whether it concern their social or their religious worth. We have continually to deal with aspects of the Reformation which must appear to the truly religious consciousness as incidental and even superficial. For we are merely attempting to clarify the part which religious forces have played in forming the developing web of our specifically worldly modern culture, in the complex interaction of innumerable different historical factors. We are thus inquiring only to what extent certain characteristic features of this culture can be imputed to the influence of the Reformation. At the same time we must free ourselves from the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="111" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/111" data-page-number="91" data-page-quality="3" id="id-91" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/111"/></span>idea that it is possible to deduce the Reformation, as a historically necessary result, from certain economic changes. Countless historical circumstances, which cannot be reduced to any economic law, and are not susceptible of economic explanation of any sort, especially purely political processes, had to concur in order that the newly created Churches should survive at all.</p>
			<p>On the other hand, however, we have no intention whatever of maintaining such a foolish and doctrinaire thesis<sup class="plainlinks wst-ref" id="ref_32"><a href="#endnote_32">[32]</a></sup> as that the spirit of capitalism (in the provisional sense of the term explained above) could only have arisen as the result of certain effects of the Reformation, or even that capitalism as an economic system is a creation of the Reformation. In itself, the fact that certain important forms of capitalistic business organization are known to be considerably older than the Reformation is a sufficient refutation of such a claim. On the contrary, we only wish to ascertain whether and to what extent religious forces have taken part in the qualitative formation and the quantitative expansion of that spirit over the world. Furthermore, what concrete aspects of our capitalistic culture can be traced to them, In view of the tremendous confusion of interdependent influences between the material basis, the forms of social and political organization, and the ideas current in the time of the Reformation, we can only proceed by investigating whether and at what points certain. correlations between forms of religious belief and practical ethics can be worked out. At the same time we shall as far as possible clarify the manner and the general <i>direction</i> in which, by virtue of those relation<span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" data-page-index="112" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/112" data-page-number="92" data-page-quality="3" id="id-92" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/112"/></span>ships, the religious movements have influenced the development of material culture. Only when this has been determined with reasonable accuracy can the attempt be made to estimate to what extent the historical development of modern culture can be attributed to those religious forces and to what extent to others.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
