<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="yes"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" dir="ltr"><head><meta charset="UTF-8"/><link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="main.css"/><title>The Religious Foundations of Worldly Asceticism</title><style typeof="mw:Extension/templatestyles" about="#mwt1"><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-header-mainblock{margin:4px auto 4px auto;padding:0 3px;display:flex;align-items:center}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-back,.mw-parser-output .wst-header-forward{display:flex;flex:1 4 100%;min-width:min-content;align-items:center;font-size:.9em}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-nav-empty{visibility:hidden}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-back{justify-content:flex-start;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-central-cell{flex:4 1 100%;max-width:max-content;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-forward{justify-content:flex-end;text-align:right}@media(max-width:768px){.mw-parser-output .wst-header-mainblock{flex-wrap:wrap}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-central-cell{flex:0 0 100%;order:-2;width:auto}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-back,.mw-parser-output .wst-header-forward{width:auto}}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-notes{display:inline-block;border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;empty-cells:hide;font-size:.9em;line-height:1.4;margin:0 auto 4px auto;width:100%}.mw-parser-output .wst-header-left{float:left}@media screen{html.skin-theme-clientpref-night .mw-parser-output .wst-header-back-link a{color:inherit;text-decoration:underline dotted}}@media screen and (prefers-color-scheme:dark){html.skin-theme-clientpref-os .mw-parser-output .wst-header-back-link a{color:inherit;text-decoration:underline dotted}}]]></style><style><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-center{text-align:center;margin:0 auto}.mw-parser-output .wst-center.wst-center-nomargin>p{margin-top:0;margin-bottom:0}]]></style><style><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-asc{font-variant:all-small-caps}.mw-parser-output .wst-asc-initials{white-space:nowrap}.mw-parser-output .wst-asc-initials>span:not(:first-child){padding-left:0.16em}.mw-parser-output .wst-asc-initials.wst-asc-initials-nospace>span:not(:first-child){padding-left:0}]]></style><style><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-ref:target{background-color:var(--background-color-progressive-subtle--active,#cbd6f6)}]]></style><style><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .nowrap,.mw-parser-output .nowrap a:before,.mw-parser-output .nowrap .selflink:before{white-space:nowrap}]]></style><style typeof="mw:Extension/templatestyles mw:Transclusion" about="#mwt6"><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-rule{background-color:currentcolor;color:inherit;width:auto;margin:2px auto 2px auto;height:1px;overflow:hidden}.mw-parser-output .wst-rule.wst-rule-left{margin-left:0}.mw-parser-output .wst-rule.wst-rule-right{margin-right:0}.mw-parser-output .wst-rule.__uirule{background-color:#a2a9b1;color:inherit;border:0;margin-top:0.2em;margin-bottom:0.2em}]]></style><style typeof="mw:Extension/templatestyles mw:Transclusion" about="#mwt8"><![CDATA[.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs{font-size:83%;clear:both;line-height:1.25;margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs ol.references{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs-ruled{border-top:1px solid;padding-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs ol.references.uksi{margin-top:0;list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .wst-smallrefs ol.references.uksi li::marker{font-weight:bold}]]></style></head><body class="mw-content-ltr sitedir-ltr ltr mw-body-content parsoid-body mediawiki mw-parser-output" dir="ltr" data-mw-parsoid-version="0.23.0.0-alpha11" data-mw-html-version="2.8.0" xml:lang="en"><section data-mw-section-id="0">
<p><span style="display:none" id="dynamic_layout_overrider-n217" about="#mwt4" typeof="mw:Transclusion">Layout 2</span></p>
<div class="prp-pages-output" typeof="mw:Extension/pages" about="#mwt5" xml:lang="en">
<span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-95" data-page-number="95" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/115" data-page-index="115" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/115"/></span><div class="wst-center tiInherit">
<p><span class="wst-asc"><span style="letter-spacing:0.15em;">CHAPTER IV</span></span>
</p><p><span style="font-size:120%;">THE RELIGIOUS FOUNDATIONS OF</span> 
</p><p><span style="font-size:120%;">WORLDLY ASCETICISM</span>
</p>
</div> 
<p><span class="smallcaps" style="font-variant:small-caps;">In</span> history there have been four principal forms of ascetic Protestantism (in the sense of word here used): (1) Calvinism in the form which it assumed in the main area of its influence in Western Europe, especially in the seventeenth century; (2) Pietism; (3) Methodism; (4) the sects growing out of the Baptist movement.<sup id="ref_1-n219" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_1">[1]</a></sup> None of these movements was completely separated from the others, and even the distinction from the non-ascetic Churches of the Reformation is never perfectly clear. Methodism, which first arose in the middle of the eighteenth century within the Established Church of England, was not, in the minds of its founders, intended to form a new Church, but only a new awakening of the ascetic spirit within the old. Only in the course of its development, especially in its extension to America, did it become separate from the Anglican Church.
</p><p>Pietism first split off from the Calvinistic movement in England, and especially in Holland. It remained loosely connected with orthodoxy, shading off from it by imperceptible gradations, until at the end of the seventeenth century it was absorbed into Lutheranism under Spener's leadership. Though the dogmatic adjustment was not entirely satisfactory, it remained a movement within the Lutheran Church. Only the faction dominated by Zinzendorf, and affected by lingering Hussite and Calvinistic influences within the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-96" data-page-number="96" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/116" data-page-index="116" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/116"/></span>Moravian brotherhood, was forced, like Methodism against its will, to form a peculiar sort of sect. Calvinism and Baptism were at the beginning of their development sharply opposed to each other. But in the Baptism of the latter part of the seventeenth century they were in close contact. And even in the Independent sects of England and Holland at the beginning of the seventeenth century the transition was not abrupt. As Pietism shows, the transition to Lutheranism is also gradual, and the same is true of Calvinism and the Anglican Church, though both in external character and in the spirit of its most logical adherents the latter is more closely related to Catholicism. It is true that both the mass of the adherents and especially the staunchest champions of that ascetic movement which, in the broadest sense of a highly ambiguous word, has been called Puritanism,<sup id="ref_2-n221" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_2">[2]</a></sup> did attack the foundations of Anglicanism; but even here the differences were only gradually worked out in the course of the struggle. Even if for the present we quite ignore the questions of government and organization which do not interest us here, the facts are just the same. The dogmatic differences, even the most important, such as those over the doctrines of predestination and justification, were combined in the most complex ways, and even at the beginning of the seventeenth century regularly, though not without exception, prevented the maintenance of unity in the Church. Above all, the types of moral conduct in which we are interested may be found in a similar manner among the adherents of the most various denominations, derived from any one of the four sources mentioned above, or a combination of several <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-97" data-page-number="97" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/117" data-page-index="117" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/117"/></span>of them. We shall see that similar ethical maxims may be correlated with very different dogmatic foundations. Also the important literary tools for the saving of souls, above all the casuistic compendia of the various denominations, influenced each other in the course of time; one finds great similarities in them, in spite of very great differences in actual conduct.
</p><p>It would almost seem as though we had best completely ignore both the dogmatic foundations and the ethical theory and confine our attention to the moral practice so far as it can be determined. That, however, is not true. The various different dogmatic roots of ascetic morality did no doubt die out after terrible struggles. But the original connection with those dogmas has left behind important traces in the later undogmatic ethics; moreover, only the knowledge of the original body of ideas can help us to understand the connection of that morality with the idea of the after-life which absolutely dominated the most spiritual men of that time. Without its power, overshadowing everything else, no moral awakening which seriously influenced practical life came into being in that period.
</p><p>We are naturally not concerned with the question of what was theoretically and officially taught in the ethical compendia of the time, however much practical significance this may have had through the influence of Church discipline, pastoral work, and preaching.<sup id="ref_3-n223" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_3">[3]</a></sup> We are interested rather in something entirely different. the influence of those psychological sanctions which, originating in religious belief and the practice of religion, gave a direction to practical conduct and held the individual to it. Now these sanctions were to a large <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-98" data-page-number="98" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/118" data-page-index="118" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/118"/></span>extent derived from the peculiarities of the religious ideas behind them. The men of that day were occupied with abstract dogmas to an extent which itself can only be understood when we perceive the connection of these dogmas with practical religious interests. A few observations on dogma,<sup id="ref_4-n225" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_4">[4]</a></sup> which will seem to the nontheological reader as dull as they will hasty and superficial to the theologian, are indispensable. We can of course only proceed by presenting these religious ideas in the artificial simplicity of ideal types, as they could at best but seldom be found in history. For just because of the impossibility of drawing sharp boundaries in historical reality we can only hope to understand their specific importance from an investigation of them in their most consistent and logical forms.
</p>
<div class="wst-center tiInherit">
<p><span class="smallcaps" style="font-variant:small-caps;">A. Calvinism</span>
</p>
</div>
<p>Now Calvinism<sup id="ref_5-n226" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_5">[5]</a></sup> was the faith<sup id="ref_6-n227" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_6">[6]</a></sup> over which the great political and cultural struggles of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were fought in the most highly developed countries, the Netherlands, England, and France. To it we shall hence turn first. At that time, and in general even to-day, the doctrine of predestination was considered its most characteristic dogma. It is true that there has been controversy as to whether it is the most essential dogma of the Reformed Church or only an appendage. Judgments of the importance of a historical phenomenon may be judgments of value or faith, namely, when they refer to what is alone interesting, or alone in the long run valuable in it. Or, on the other hand, they may refer to its <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-99" data-page-number="99" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/119" data-page-index="119" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/119"/></span>influence on other historical processes as a causal factor. Then we are concerned with judgments of historical imputation. If now we start, as we must do here, from the latter standpoint and inquire into the significance which is to be attributed to that dogma by virtue of its cultural and historical consequences, it must certainly be rated very highly.<sup id="ref_7-n229" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_7">[7]</a></sup> The movement which Oldenbarneveld led was shattered by it. The schism in the English Church became irrevocable under James I after the Crown and the Puritans came to differ dogmatically over just this doctrine. Again and again it was looked upon as the real element of political danger in Calvinism and attacked as such by those in authority.<sup id="ref_8-n230" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_8">[8]</a></sup> The great synods of the seventeenth century, above all those of Dordrecht and Westminster, besides numerous smaller ones, made its elevation to canonical authority the central purpose of their work. It served as a rallying-point to countless heroes of the Church militant, and in both the eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries it caused schisms in the Church and formed the battle-cry of great new awakenings. We cannot pass it by, and since to-day it can no longer be assumed as known to all educated men, we can best learn its content from the authoritative words of the Westminster Confession of 1647, which in this regard is simply repeated by both Independent and Baptist creeds.
</p><p>"Chapter IX (of Free Will), No. 3. Man, by his fall into a state of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of will to any spiritual good accompanying salvation. So that a natural man, being altogether averse from that Good, and dead in sin, is not able, by his own <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-100" data-page-number="100" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/120" data-page-index="120" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/120"/></span>strength, to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto.
</p><p>"Chapter III (of God's Eternal Decree), No. 3. By the decree of God, for the manifestation of His glory, some men and angels are predestinated unto everlasting life, and others foreordained to everlasting death.
</p><p>"No. 5. Those of mankind that are predestinated unto life, God before the foundation of the world was laid, according to His eternal and immutable purpose, and the secret counsel and good pleasure of His will, hath chosen in Christ unto everlasting glory, out of His mere free grace and love, without any foresight of faith or good works, or perseverance in either of them, or any other thing in the creature as conditions, or causes moving Him thereunto, and all to the praise of His glorious grace.
</p><p>"No. 7. The rest of mankind God was pleased, according to the unsearchable counsel of His own will, whereby He extendeth, or with-holdeth mercy, as He pleaseth, for the glory of His sovereign power over His creatures, to pass by, and to ordain them to dishonour and wrath for their sin, to the praise of His glorious justice.
</p><p>"Chapter X (of Effectual Calling), No. 1. All those whom God hath predestinated unto life, and those only, He is pleased in His appointed and accepted time effectually to call, by His word and spirit (out of that state of sin and death, in which they are by nature) <span class="nowrap">. . .</span> taking away their heart of stone, and giving unto them an heart of flesh; renewing their wills, and by His almighty power determining them to that which is good<span class="nowrap">. . . .</span>
</p>
<div class="__nop wst-nop"/>
<p> <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-101" data-page-number="101" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/121" data-page-index="121" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/121"/></span>"Chapter V (of Providence), No.6. As for those wicked and ungodly men, whom God as a righteous judge, for former sins doth blind and harden, from them He not only with-holdeth His grace, whereby they might have been enlightened in their understandings and wrought upon in their hearts, but sometimes also withdraweth the gifts which they had and exposeth them to such objects as their corruption makes occasion of sin: and withal, gives them over to their own lusts, the temptations of the world, and the power of Satan: whereby it comes to pass that they harden themselves, even under those means, which God useth for the softening of others."<sup id="ref_9-n233" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_9">[9]</a></sup>
</p><p>"Though I may be sent to Hell for it, such a God will never command my respect", was Milton's well-known opinion of the doctrine.<sup id="ref_10-n234" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_10">[10]</a></sup> But we are here concerned not with the evaluation, but the historical significance of the dogma. We can only briefly sketch the question of how the doctrine originated and how it fitted into the framework of Calvinistic theology.
</p><p>Two paths leading to it were possible. The phenomenon of the religious sense of grace is combined, in the most active and passionate of those great worshippers which Christianity has produced again and again since Augustine, with the feeling of certainty that that grace is the sole product of an objective power, and not in the least to be attributed to personal worth. The powerful feeling of light-hearted assurance, in which the tremendous pressure of their sense of sin is released, apparently breaks over them with elemental force and destroys every possibility of the belief that this overpowering gift of grace could owe anything to their own <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-102" data-page-number="102" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/122" data-page-index="122" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/122"/></span>co-operation or could be connected with achievements or qualities of their own faith and will. At the time of Luther's greatest religious creativeness, when he was capable of writing his <i>Freiheit eines Christenmenschen</i>, God's secret decree was also to him most definitely the sole and ultimate source of his state of religious grace.<sup id="ref_11-n236" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_11">[11]</a></sup> Even later he did not formally abandon it. But not only did the idea not assume a central position for him, but it receded more and more into the background, the more his position as responsible head of his Church forced him into practical politics. Melancthon quite deliberately avoided adopting the dark and dangerous teaching in the Augsburg Confession, and for the Church fathers of Lutheranism it was an article of faith that grace was revocable (<i>amissibilis</i>), and could be won again by penitent humility and faithful trust in the word of God and in the sacraments.
</p><p>With Calvin the process was just the opposite; the significance of the doctrine for him increased,<sup id="ref_12-n237" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_12">[12]</a></sup> perceptibly in the course of his polemical controversies with theological opponents. It is not fully developed until the third edition of his <i>Institutes</i>, and only gained its position of central prominence after his death in the great struggles which the Synods of Dordrecht and Westminster sought to put an end to. With Calvin the <i>decretum horribile</i> is derived not, as with Luther, from religious experience, but from the logical necessity of his thought; therefore its importance increases with every increase in the logical consistency of that religious thought. The interest of it is solely in God, not in man; God does not exist for men, but men for the sake of <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-103" data-page-number="103" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/123" data-page-index="123" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/123"/></span>God.<sup id="ref_13-n239" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_13">[13]</a></sup> All creation, including of course the fact, as it undoubtedly was for Calvin, that only a small proportion of men are chosen for eternal grace, can have any meaning only as means to the glory and majesty of God. To apply earthly standards of justice to His sovereign decrees is meaningless and an insult to His Majesty,<sup id="ref_14-n240" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_14">[14]</a></sup> since He and He alone is free, i.e. is subject to no law. His decrees can only be understood by or even known to us in so far as it has been His pleasure to reveal them. We can only hold to these fragments of eternal truth. Everything else, including the meaning of our individual destiny, is hidden in dark mystery which it would be both impossible to pierce and presumptuous to question.
</p><p>For the damned to complain of their lot would be, much the same as for animals to bemoan the fact they were not born as men. For everything of the flesh is separated from God by an unbridgeable gulf and deserves of Him only eternal death, in so far as He has not decreed otherwise for the glorification of His Majesty. We know only that a part of humanity is saved, the rest damned. To assume that human merit or guilt play a part in determining this destiny would be to think of God's absolutely free decrees, which have been settled from eternity, as subject to change by human influence, an impossible contradiction. The Father in heaven of the New Testament, so human and under-standing, who rejoices over the repentance of a sinner as a woman over the lost piece of silver she has found, is gone. His place has been taken by a transcendental being, beyond the reach of human understanding, who with His quite incomprehensible decrees has decided <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-104" data-page-number="104" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/124" data-page-index="124" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/124"/></span>the fate of every individual and regulated the tiniest details of the cosmos from eternity.<sup id="ref_15-n242" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_15">[15]</a></sup> God's grace is, since His decrees cannot change, as impossible for those to whom He has granted it to lose as it is unattainable for those to whom He has denied it.
</p><p>In its extreme inhumanity this doctrine must above all have had one consequence for the life of a generation which surrendered to its magnificent consistency. That was a feeling of unprecedented inner loneliness of the single individual.<sup id="ref_16-n243" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_16">[16]</a></sup> In what was for the man of the age of the Reformation the most important thing in life, his eternal salvation, he was forced to follow his path alone to meet a destiny which had been decreed for him from eternity. No one could help him. No priest, for the chosen one can understand the word of God only in his own heart. No sacraments, for though the sacraments had been ordained by God for the increase of His glory, and must hence be scrupulously observed, they are not a means to the attainment of grace, but only the subjective <i>externa subsidia</i> of faith. No Church, for though it was held that <i>extra ecclesiam nulla salus</i> in the sense that whoever kept away from the true Church could never belong to God's chosen band,<sup id="ref_17-n244" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_17">[17]</a></sup> nevertheless the membership of the external Church included the doomed. They should belong to it and be subjected to its discipline, not in order thus to attain salvation, that is impossible, but because, for the glory of God, they too must be forced to obey His commandments. Finally, even no God. For even Christ had died only for the elect,<sup id="ref_18-n245" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_18">[18]</a></sup> for whose benefit God had decreed His martyrdom from eternity. This, the complete elimination of salvation through the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-105" data-page-number="105" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/125" data-page-index="125" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/125"/></span>Church and the sacraments (which was in Lutheranism by no means developed to its final conclusions), was what formed the absolutely decisive difference from Catholicism.
</p><p>That great historic process in the development of religions, the elimination of magic from the world<sup id="ref_19-n247" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_19">[19]</a></sup> which had begun with the old Hebrew prophets and, in conjunction with Hellenistic scientific thought, had repudiated all magical means to salvation as superstition and sin, came here to its logical conclusion. The genuine Puritan even rejected all signs of religious ceremony at the grave and buried his nearest and dearest without song or ritual in order that no superstition, no trust in the effects of magical and sacramental forces on salvation, should creep in.<sup id="ref_20-n248" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_20">[20]</a></sup>
</p><p>There was not only no magical means of attaining the grace of God for those to whom God had decided to deny it, but no means whatever. Combined with the harsh doctrines of the absolute transcendentality of God and the corruption of everything pertaining to the flesh, this inner isolation of the individual contains, on the one hand, the reason for the entirely negative attitude, of Puritanism to all the sensuous and emotional elements in culture and in religion, because they are of no use toward salvation and promote sentimental illusions and idolatrous superstitions. Thus it provides a basis for a fundamental antagonism to sensuous culture of all kinds.<sup id="ref_21-n249" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_21">[21]</a></sup> On the other hand, it forms one of the roots of that disillusioned and pessimistically inclined individualism<sup id="ref_22-n250" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_22">[22]</a></sup> which can even to-day be identified in the national characters and the institutions of the peoples with a Puritan past, in such a striking <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-106" data-page-number="106" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/126" data-page-index="126" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/126"/></span>contrast to the quite different spectacles through which the Enlightenment later looked upon men.<sup id="ref_23-n252" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_23">[23]</a></sup> We can clearly identify the traces of the influence of the doctrine of predestination in the elementary forms of conduct and attitude toward life in the era with which we are concerned, even where its authority as a dogma was on the decline. It was in fact only the most extreme form of that exclusive trust in God in which we are here interested. It comes out for instance in the strikingly frequent repetition, especially in the English Puritan literature, of warnings against any trust in the aid of friendship of men.<sup id="ref_24-n253" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_24">[24]</a></sup> Even the amiable Baxter counsels deep distrust of even one's closest friend, and Bailey directly exhorts to trust no one and to say nothing compromising to anyone. Only God should be your confidant.<sup id="ref_25-n254" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_25">[25]</a></sup> In striking contrast to Lutheranism, this attitude toward life was also connected with the quiet disappearance of the private confession, of which Calvin was suspicious only on account of its possible sacramental misinterpretation, from all the regions of fully developed Calvinism. That was an occurrence of the greatest importance. In the first place it is a symptom of the type of influence this religion exercised. Further, however, it was a psychological stimulus to the development of their ethical attitude. The means to a periodical discharge of the emotional sense of sin<sup id="ref_26-n255" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_26">[26]</a></sup> was done away with.
</p><p>Of the consequences for the ethical conduct of everyday life we speak later. But for the general religious situation of a man the consequences are evident. In spite of the necessity of membership in the true Church<sup id="ref_27-n256" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_27">[27]</a></sup> for salvation, the Calvinist's intercourse <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-107" data-page-number="107" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/127" data-page-index="127" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/127"/></span>with his God was carried on in deep spiritual isolation. To see the specific results<sup id="ref_28-n258" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_28">[28]</a></sup> of this peculiar atmosphere, it is only necessary to read Bunyan's <i>Pilgrim's Progress</i>,<sup id="ref_29-n259" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_29">[29]</a></sup> by far the most widely read book of the whole Puritan literature. In the description of Christian's attitude after he had realized that he was living in the City of Destruction and he had received the call to take up his pilgrimage to the celestial city, wife and children cling to him, but stopping his ears with his fingers and crying, "life, eternal life", he staggers forth across the fields. No refinement could surpass the naïve feeling of the tinker who, writing in his prison cell, earned the applause of a believing world, in expressing the emotions of the faithful Puritan, thinking only of his own salvation. It is expressed in the unctuous conversations which he holds with fellow-seekers on the way, in a manner somewhat reminiscent of Gottfried Keller's <i>Gerechte Kammacher</i>. Only when he himself is safe does it occur to him that it would be nice to have his family with him. It is the same anxious fear of death and the beyond which we feel so vividly in Alfonso of Liguori, as Döllinger has described him to us. It is worlds removed from that spirit of proud worldliness which Machiavelli expresses in relating the fame of those Florentine citizens who, in their struggle against the Pope and his excommunication, had held "Love of their native city higher than the fear for the salvation of their souls". And it is of course even farther from the feelings which Richard Wagner puts into the mouth of Siegmund before his fatal combat, "Grüsse mir Wotan, grüsse mir Wallhall—Doch von Wallhall's spröden Wonnen sprich du wahrlich mir nicht". But <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-108" data-page-number="108" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/128" data-page-index="128" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/128"/></span>the effects of this fear on Bunyan and Liguori are characteristically different. The same fear which drives the latter to every conceivable self-humiliation spurs the former on to a restless and systematic struggle with life. Whence comes this difference?
</p><p>It seems at first a mystery how the undoubted superiority of Calvinism in social organization can be connected with this tendency to tear the individual away from the closed ties with which he is bound to this world.<sup id="ref_30-n261" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_30">[30]</a></sup> But, however strange it may seem, it follows front the peculiar form which the Christian brotherly love was forced to take under the pressure of the inner isolation of the individual through the Calvinistic faith. In the first place it follows dogmatically.<sup id="ref_31-n262" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_31">[31]</a></sup> The world exists to serve the glorification of God and for that purpose alone. The elected Christian is in the world only to increase this glory of God by fulfilling His commandments to the best of his ability. But God requires social achievement of the Christian because He wills that social life shall be organized according to His commandments, in accordance with that purpose. The social<sup id="ref_32-n263" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_32">[32]</a></sup> activity of the Christian in the world is solely activity <i>in majorem gloriam Dei</i>. This character is hence shared by labour in a calling which serves the mundane life of the community. Even in Luther we found specialized labour in callings justified in terms of brotherly love. But what for him remained an uncertain, purely intellectual suggestion became for the Calvinists a characteristic element in their ethical system. Brotherly love, since it may only be practised for the glory of God<sup id="ref_33" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_33">[33]</a></sup> and not in the service of the flesh,<sup id="ref_34" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_34">[34]</a></sup> is expressed in the first place in the fulfilment <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-109" data-page-number="109" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/129" data-page-index="129" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/129"/></span>of the daily tasks given by the <i>lex naturæ</i>; and in the process this fulfilment assumes a peculiarly objective and impersonal character, that of service in the interest of the rational organization of our social environment. For the wonderfully purposeful organization and arrangement of this cosmos is, according both to the revelation of the Bible and to natural intuition, evidently designed by God to serve the utility of the human race. This makes labour in the service of impersonal social usefulness appear to promote the glory of God and hence to be willed by Him. The complete elimination of the theodicy problem and of all those questions about the meaning of the world and of life, which have tortured others, was as self-evident to the Puritan as, for quite different reasons, to the Jew, and even in a certain sense to all the non-mystical types of Christian religion.
</p><p>To this economy of forces Calvinism added another tendency which worked in the same direction. The conflict between the individual and the ethic (in <a href="https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Author:S%C3%B8ren_Aabye_Kierkegaard" title="Author:Søren Aabye Kierkegaard">Sören Kierkegaard</a>'s sense) did not exist for Calvinism, although it placed the individual entirely on his own responsibility in religious matters. This is not the place to analyse the reasons for this fact, or its significance for the political and economic rationalism of Calvinism. The source of the utilitarian character of Calvinistic ethics lies here, and important peculiarities of the Calvinistic idea of the calling were derived from the same source as well.<sup id="ref_35" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_35">[35]</a></sup> But for the moment we must return to the special consideration of the doctrine of
predestination.
</p><p>For us the decisive problem is: How was this doctrine borne<sup id="ref_36" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_36">[36]</a></sup> in an age to which the after-life was not only <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-110" data-page-number="110" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/130" data-page-index="130" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/130"/></span>more important, but in many ways also more certain, than all the interests of life in this world?<sup id="ref_37" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_37">[37]</a></sup> The question, Am I one of the elect? must sooner or later have arisen for every believer and have forced all other interests into the background. And how can I be sure of this state of grace?<sup id="ref_38" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_38">[38]</a></sup> For Calvin himself this was not a problem. He felt himself to be a chosen agent of the Lord, and was certain of his own salvation. Accordingly, to the question of how the individual can be certain of his own election, he has at bottom only the answer that we should be content with the knowledge that God has chosen and depend further only on that implicit trust in Christ which is the result of true faith. He rejects in principle the assumption that one can learn from the conduct of others whether they are chosen or damned. It is an unjustifiable attempt to force God's secrets. The elect differ externally in this life in no way from the damned<sup id="ref_39" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_39">[39]</a></sup>; and even all the subjective experiences of the chosen are, as <i>ludibria spiritus sancti</i>, possible for the damned with the single exception of that <i>finaliter</i> expectant, trusting faith. The elect thus are and remain God's invisible Church.
</p><p>Quite naturally this attitude was impossible for his followers as early as Beza, and, above all, for the broad mass of ordinary men. For them the <i>certitudo salutis</i> in the sense of the recognizability of the state of grace necessarily became of absolutely dominant importance.<sup id="ref_40" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_40">[40]</a></sup> So, wherever the doctrine of predestination was held, the question could not be suppressed whether there were any infallible criteria by which membership in the <i>electi</i> could be known. Not only has this question <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-111" data-page-number="111" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/131" data-page-index="131" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/131"/></span>continually had a central importance in the development of the Pietism which first arose on the basis of the Reformed Church; it has in fact in a certain sense at times been fundamental to it. But when we consider the great political and social importance of the Reformed doctrine and practice of the Communion, we shall see how great a part was played during the whole seventeenth century outside of Pietism by the possibility of ascertaining the state of grace of the individual. On it depended, for instance, his admission to Communion, i.e. to the central religious ceremony which determined the social standing of the participants.
</p><p>It was impossible, at least so far as the question of a man's own state of grace arose, to be satisfied<sup id="ref_41" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_41">[41]</a></sup> with Calvin's trust in the testimony of the expectant faith resulting from grace, even though the orthodox doctrine had never formally abandoned that criterion.<sup id="ref_42" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_42">[42]</a></sup> Above all, practical pastoral work, which had immediately to deal with all the suffering caused by the doctrine, could not be satisfied. It met these difficulties in various ways.<sup id="ref_43" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_43">[43]</a></sup> So far as predestination was not reinterpreted, toned down, or fundamentally abandoned,<sup id="ref_44" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_44">[44]</a></sup> two principal, mutually connected, types of pastoral advice appear. On the one hand it is held to be an absolute duty to consider oneself chosen, and to combat all doubts as temptations of the devil,<sup id="ref_45" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_45">[45]</a></sup> since lack of self-confidence is the result of insufficient faith, hence of imperfect grace. The exhortation of the apostle to make fast one's own call is here interpreted as a duty to attain certainty of one's own election and justification in the daily struggle of life. In the place of the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-112" data-page-number="112" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/132" data-page-index="132" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/132"/></span>humble sinners to whom Luther promises grace if they trust themselves to God in penitent faith are bred those self-confident saints<sup id="ref_46" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_46">[46]</a></sup> whom we can rediscover in the hard Puritan merchants of the heroic age of capitalism and in isolated instances down to the present. On the other hand, in order to attain that self-confidence intense worldly activity is recommended as the most suitable means.<sup id="ref_47" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_47">[47]</a></sup> It and it alone disperses religious doubts and gives the certainty of grace.
</p><p>That worldly activity should be considered capable of this achievement, that it could, so to speak, be considered the most suitable means of counteracting feelings of religious anxiety, finds its explanation in the fundamental peculiarities of religious feeling in the Reformed Church, which come most clearly to light in its differences from Lutheranism in the doctrine of justification by faith. These differences are analysed so subtly and with such objectivity and avoidance of value-judgments in Schneckenburger's excellent lectures,<sup id="ref_48" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_48">[48]</a></sup> that the following brief observations can for the most part simply rest upon his discussion.
</p><p>The highest religious experience which the Lutheran faith strives to attain, especially as it developed in the course of the seventeenth century, is the <i>unio mystica</i> with the deity.<sup id="ref_49" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_49">[49]</a></sup> As the name itself, which is unknown to the Reformed faith in this form, suggests, it is a feeling of actual absorption in the deity, that of a real entrance of the divine into the soul of the believer. It is qualitatively similar to the aim of the contemplation of the German mystics and is characterized by its passive search for the fulfilment of the yearning for rest in God.
</p>
<div class="__nop wst-nop"/>
<p> <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-113" data-page-number="113" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/133" data-page-index="133" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/133"/></span>Now the history of philosophy shows that religious belief which is primarily mystical may very well be compatible with a pronounced sense of reality in the field of empirical fact; it may even support it directly on account of the repudiation of dialectic doctrines. Furthermore, mysticism may indirectly even further the interests of rational conduct. Nevertheless, the positive valuation of external activity is lacking in its relation to the world. In addition to this, Lutheranism combines the <i>unio mystica</i> with that deep feeling of sin-stained unworthiness which is essential to preserve the <i>pœnitentia quotidiana</i> of the faithful Lutheran, thereby maintaining the humility and simplicity indispensable for the forgiveness of sins. The typical religion of the Reformed Church, on the other hand, has from the beginning repudiated both this purely inward emotional piety of Lutheranism and the Quietist escape from everything of Pascal. A real penetration of the human soul by the divine was made impossible by the absolute transcendentality of God. compared to the flesh: <i>finitum non est capax infiniti</i>. The community of the elect with their God could only take place and be perceptible to them in that God worked (<i>operatur</i>) through them and that they were conscious of it. That is, their action originated from the faith caused by God's grace, and this faith in turn justified itself by the quality of that action. Deep-lying differences of the most important conditions of salvation<sup id="ref_50" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_50">[50]</a></sup> which apply to the classification of all practical religious activity appear here. The religious believer can make himself sure of his state of grace either in that he feels himself to be the vessel of the Holy Spirit <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-114" data-page-number="114" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/134" data-page-index="134" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/134"/></span>or the tool of the divine will. In the former case his religious life tends to mysticism and emotionalism, in the latter to ascetic action; Luther stood close to the former type, Calvinism belonged definitely to the latter. The Calvinist also wanted to be saved <i>sola fide</i>. But since Calvin viewed all pure feelings and emotions, no matter how exalted they might seem to be, with suspicion,<sup id="ref_51" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_51">[51]</a></sup> faith had to be proved by its objective results in order to provide a firm foundation for the <i>certitudo salutis</i>. It must be a <i>fides efficax</i>,<sup id="ref_52" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_52">[52]</a></sup> the call to salvation an effectual calling (expression used in Savoy Declaration).
</p><p>If we now ask further, by what fruits the Calvinist thought himself able to identify true faith? the answer is: by a type of Christian conduct which served to increase the glory of God. Just what does so serve is to be seen in his own will as revealed either directly through the Bible or indirectly through the purposeful order of the world which he has created (<i>lex naturæ</i>).<sup id="ref_53" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_53">[53]</a></sup> Especially by comparing the condition of one's own soul with that of the elect, for instance the patriarchs, according to the Bible, could the state of one's own grace be known.<sup id="ref_54" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_54">[54]</a></sup> Only one of the elect really has the <i>fides efficax</i>,<sup id="ref_55" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_55">[55]</a></sup> only he is able by virtue of his rebirth (<i>regeneratio</i>) and the resulting sanctification (<i>sanctificatio</i>) of his whole life, to augment the glory of God by real, and not merely apparent, good works. It was through the consciousness that his conduct, at least in its fundamental character and constant ideal (<i>propositum obedientiæ</i>), rested on a power<sup id="ref_56" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_56">[56]</a></sup> within himself working for the glory of God; that it is not only willed of God but rather done by God<sup id="ref_57" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_57">[57]</a></sup> that he attained the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-115" data-page-number="115" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/135" data-page-index="135" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/135"/></span>highest good towards which this religion strove, the certainty of salvation.<sup id="ref_58" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_58">[58]</a></sup> That it was attainable was proved by 2 Cor. xiii. 5.<sup id="ref_59" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_59">[59]</a></sup> Thus, however useless good works might be as a means of attaining salvation, for even the elect remain beings of the flesh, and everything they do falls infinitely short of divine standards, nevertheless, they are indispensable as a sign of election.<sup id="ref_60" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_60">[60]</a></sup> They are the technical means, not of purchasing salvation, but of getting rid of the fear of damnation. In this sense they are occasionally referred to as directly necessary for salvation<sup id="ref_61" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_61">[61]</a></sup> or the <i>possessio salutis</i> is made conditional on them.<sup id="ref_62" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_62">[62]</a></sup>
</p><p>In practice this means that God helps those who help themselves.<sup id="ref_63" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_63">[63]</a></sup> Thus the Calvinist, as it is sometimes put, himself creates<sup id="ref_64" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_64">[64]</a></sup> his own salvation, or, as would be more correct, the conviction of it. But this creation cannot, as in Catholicism, consist in a gradual accumulation of individual good works to one's credit, but rather in a systematic self-control which at every moment stands before the inexorable alternative, chosen or damned. This brings us to a very important point in our investigation.
</p><p>It is common knowledge that Lutherans have again and again accused this line of thought, which was worked out in the Reformed Churches and sects with increasing clarity,<sup id="ref_65" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_65">[65]</a></sup> of reversion to the doctrine of salvation by works.<sup id="ref_66" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_66">[66]</a></sup> And however justified the protest of the accused against identification of their dogmatic position with the Catholic doctrine, this accusation has surely been made with reason if by it is meant the practical consequences for the everyday life of the average Christian of the Reformed Church.<sup id="ref_67" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_67">[67]</a></sup> For a <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-116" data-page-number="116" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/136" data-page-index="136" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/136"/></span>more intensive form of the religious valuation of moral action than that to which Calvinism led its adherents has perhaps never existed. But what is important for the practical significance of this sort of salvation by works must be sought in a knowledge of the particular qualities which characterized their type of ethical conduct and distinguished it from the everyday life of an average Christian of the Middle Ages. The difference may well be formulated as follows: the normal mediæval Catholic layman<sup id="ref_68" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_68">[68]</a></sup> lived ethically, so to speak, from hand to mouth. In the first place he conscientiously fulfilled his traditional duties. But beyond that minimum his good works did not necessarily form a connected, or at least not a rationalized, system of life, but rather remained a succession of individual acts. He could use them as occasion demanded, to atone for particular sins, to better his chances for salvation, or, toward the end of his life, as a sort of insurance premium. Of course the Catholic ethic was an ethic of intentions. But the concrete <i>intentio</i> of the single act determined its value. And the single good or bad action was credited to the doer determining his temporal and eternal fate. Quite realistically the Church recognized that man was not an absolutely clearly defined unity to be judged one way or the other, but that his moral life was normally subject to conflicting motives and his action contradictory. Of course, it required as an ideal a change of life in principle. But it weakened just this requirement (for the average) by one of its most important means of power and education, the sacrament of absolution, the function of which was connected with the deepest roots of the peculiarly Catholic religion.
</p>
<div class="__nop wst-nop"/>
<p> <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-117" data-page-number="117" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/137" data-page-index="137" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/137"/></span>The rationalization of the world, the elimination of magic as a means to salvation,<sup id="ref_69" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_69">[69]</a></sup> the Catholics had not carried nearly so far as the Puritans (and before them the Jews) had done. To the Catholic<sup id="ref_70" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_70">[70]</a></sup> the absolution of his Church was a compensation for his own imperfection. The priest was a magician who performed the miracle of transubstantiation, and who held the key to eternal life in his hand. One could turn to him in grief and penitence. He dispensed atonement, hope of grace, certainty of forgiveness, and thereby granted release from that tremendous tension to which the Calvinist was doomed by an inexorable fate, admitting of no mitigation. For him such friendly and human comforts did not exist. He could not hope to atone for hours of weakness or of thoughtlessness by increased good will at other times, as the Catholic or even the Lutheran could. The God of Calvinism demanded of his believers not single good works, but a life of good works combined into a unified system.<sup id="ref_71" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_71">[71]</a></sup> There was no place for the very human Catholic cycle of sin, repentance, atonement, release, followed by renewed sin. Nor was there any balance of merit for a life as a whole which could be adjusted by temporal punishments or the Churches' means of grace.
</p><p>The moral conduct of the average man was thus deprived of its planless and unsystematic character and subjected to a consistent method for conduct as a whole. It is no accident that the name of Methodists stuck to the participants in the last great revival of Puritan ideas in the eighteenth century just as the term Precisians, which has the same meaning, was applied to their spiritual ancestors in the seventeenth century.<sup id="ref_72" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_72">[72]</a></sup> <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-118" data-page-number="118" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/138" data-page-index="138" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/138"/></span>For only by a fundamental change in the whole meaning of life at every moment and in every action<sup id="ref_73" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_73">[73]</a></sup> could the effects of grace transforming a man from the <i>status naturæ</i> to the <i>status gratiæ</i> be proved.
</p><p>The life of the saint was directed solely toward a transcendental end, salvation. But precisely for that reason it was thoroughly rationalized in this world and dominated entirely by the aim to add to the glory of God on earth. Never has the precept <i>omnia in majorem dei gloriam</i> been taken with more bitter seriousness.<sup id="ref_74" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_74">[74]</a></sup> Only a life guided by constant thought could achieve conquest over the state of nature. <a href="https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Author:Ren%C3%A9_Descartes" title="Author:René Descartes">Descartes's</a> <i>cogito ergo sum</i> was taken over by the contemporary Puritans with this ethical reinterpretation.<sup id="ref_75" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_75">[75]</a></sup> It was this rationalization which gave the Reformed faith its peculiar ascetic tendency, and is the basis both of its relationship<sup id="ref_76" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_76">[76]</a></sup> to and its conflict with Catholicism. For naturally similar things were not unknown to Catholicism.
</p><p>Without doubt Christian asceticism, both outwardly and in its inner meaning, contains many different things. But it has had a definitely rational character in its highest Occidental forms as early as the Middle Ages, and in several forms even in antiquity. The great historical significance of Western monasticism, as contrasted with that of the Orient, is based on this fact, not in all cases, but in its general type. In the rules of St. Benedict, still more with the monks of Cluny, again with the Cistercians, and most strongly the Jesuits, it has become emancipated from planless otherworldliness and irrational self-torture. It had developed a systematic method of rational conduct with the purpose of overcoming the <i>status naturæ</i>, to free <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-119" data-page-number="119" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/139" data-page-index="139" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/139"/></span>man from the power of irrational impulses and his dependence on the world and on nature. It attempted to subject man to the supremacy of a purposeful will,<sup id="ref_77" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_77">[77]</a></sup> to bring his actions under constant self-control with a careful consideration of their ethical consequences. Thus it trained the monk, objectively, as a worker in the service of the kingdom of God, and thereby further, subjectively, assured the salvation of his soul. This active self-control, which formed the end of the <i>exercitia</i> of St. Ignatius and of the rational monastic virtues everywhere,<sup id="ref_78" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_78">[78]</a></sup> was also the most important practical ideal of Puritanism.<sup id="ref_79" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_79">[79]</a></sup> In the deep contempt with which the cool reserve of its adherents is contrasted, in the reports of the trials of its martyrs, with the undisciplined blustering of the noble prelates and officials<sup id="ref_80" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_80">[80]</a></sup> can be seen that respect for quiet self-control which still distinguishes the best type of English or American gentleman to-day.<sup id="ref_81" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_81">[81]</a></sup> To put it in our terms<sup id="ref_82" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_82">[82]</a></sup>: The Puritan, like every rational type of asceticism, tried to enable a man to maintain and act upon his constant motives, especially those which it taught him itself, against the emotions. In this formal psychological sense of the term it tried to make him into a personality. Contrary to many popular ideas, the end of this asceticism was to be able to lead an alert, intelligent life: the most urgent task the destruction of spontaneous, impulsive enjoyment, the most important means was to bring order into the conduct of its adherents. All these important points are emphasized in the rules of Catholic monasticism as strongly<sup id="ref_83" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_83">[83]</a></sup> as in the principles of conduct of the Calvinists.<sup id="ref_84" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_84">[84]</a></sup> On this methodical control over the whole man rests the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-120" data-page-number="120" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/140" data-page-index="140" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/140"/></span>enormous expansive power of both, especially the ability of Calvinism as against Lutheranism to defend the cause of Protestantism as the Church militant.
</p><p>On the other hand, the difference of the Calvinistic from the mediæval asceticism is evident. It consisted in the disappearance of the <i>consilia evangelica</i> and the accompanying transformation of asceticism to activity within the world. It is not as though Catholicism had restricted the methodical life to monastic cells. This was by no means the case either in theory or in practice. On the contrary, it has already been pointed out that, in spite of the greater ethical moderation of Catholicism, an ethically unsystematic life did not satisfy the highest ideals which it had set up even for the life of the layman.<sup id="ref_85" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_85">[85]</a></sup> The tertiary order of St. Francis was, for instance, a powerful attempt in the direction of an ascetic penetration of everyday life, and, as we know, by no means the only one. But, in fact, works like the <i>Nachfolge Christi</i> show, through the manner in which their strong influence was exerted, that the way of life preached in them was felt to be something higher than the everyday morality which sufficed as a minimum, and that this latter was not measured by such standards as Puritanism demanded. Moreover, the practical use made of certain institutions of the Church, above all of indulgences inevitably counteracted the tendencies toward systematic worldly asceticism. For that reason it was not felt at the time of the Reformation to be merely an unessential abuse, but one of the most fundamental evils of the Church.
</p><p>But the most important thing was the fact that the man who, <i>par excellence</i>, lived a rational life in the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-121" data-page-number="121" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/141" data-page-index="141" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/141"/></span>religious sense was, and remained, alone the monk. Thus asceticism, the more strongly it gripped an individual, simply served to drive him farther away from everyday life, because the holiest task was definitely to surpass all worldly morality.<sup id="ref_86" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_86">[86]</a></sup> Luther, who was not in any sense fulfilling any law of development, but acting upon his quite personal experience, which was, though at first somewhat uncertain in its practical consequences, later pushed farther by the political situation, had repudiated that tendency, and Calvinism simply took this over from him.<sup id="ref_87" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_87">[87]</a></sup> Sebastian Franck struck the central characteristic of this type of religion when he saw the significance of the Reformation in the fact that now every Christian had to be a monk all his life. The drain of asceticism from everyday worldly life had been stopped by a dam, and those passionately spiritual natures which had formerly supplied the highest type of monk were now forced to pursue their ascetic ideals within mundane occupations.
</p><p>But in the course of its development Calvinism added something positive to this, the idea of the necessity of proving one's faith in worldly activity.<sup id="ref_88" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_88">[88]</a></sup> Therein it gave the broader groups of religiously inclined people a positive incentive to asceticism. By founding its ethic in the doctrine of predestination, it substituted for the spiritual aristocracy of monks outside of and above the world the spiritual aristocracy of the predestined saints of God within the world.<sup id="ref_89" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_89">[89]</a></sup> It was an aristocracy which, with its <i>character indelebilis</i>, was divided from the eternally damned remainder of humanity by a more impassable and in its invisibility more terrifying gulf,<sup id="ref_90" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_90">[90]</a></sup> than separated the monk of the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-122" data-page-number="122" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/142" data-page-index="142" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/142"/></span>Middle Ages from the rest of the world about him, a gulf which penetrated all social relations with its sharp brutality. This consciousness of divine grace of the elect and holy was accompanied by an attitude toward the sin of one's neighbour, not of sympathetic understanding based on consciousness of one's own weakness, but of hatred and contempt for him as an enemy of God bearing the signs of eternal damnation.<sup id="ref_91" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_91">[91]</a></sup> This sort of feeling was capable of such intensity that it sometimes resulted in the formation of sects. This was the case when, as in the Independent movement of the seventeenth century, the genuine Calvinist doctrine that the glory of God required the Church to bring the damned under the law, was outweighed by the conviction that it was an insult to God if an unregenerate soul should be admitted to His house and partake in the sacraments, or even, as a minister, administer them.<sup id="ref_92" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_92">[92]</a></sup> Thus, as a consequence of the doctrine of proof, the Donatist idea of the Church appeared, as in the case of the Calvinistic Baptists. The full logical consequence of the demand for a pure Church, a community of those proved to be in a state of grace, was not often drawn by forming sects. Modifications in the constitution of the Church resulted from the attempt to separate regenerate from unregenerate Christians, those who were from those who were not prepared for the sacrament, to keep the government of the Church or some other privilege in the hands of the former, and only to ordain ministers of whom there was no question.<sup id="ref_93" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_93">[93]</a></sup>
</p><p>The norm by which it could always measure itself, of which it was evidently in need, this asceticism <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-123" data-page-number="123" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/143" data-page-index="143" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/143"/></span>naturally found in the Bible. It is important to note that the well-known bibliocracy of the Calvinists held the moral precepts of the Old Testament, since it was fully as authentically revealed, on the same level. of esteem as those of the New. It was only necessary that they should not obviously be applicable only to the historical circumstances of the Hebrews, or have been specifically denied by Christ. For the believer, the law was an ideal though never quite attainable norm<sup id="ref_94" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_94">[94]</a></sup> while Luther, on the other hand, originally had prized freedom from subjugation to the law as a divine privilege of the believer.<sup id="ref_95" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_95">[95]</a></sup> The influence of the God-fearing but perfectly unemotional wisdom of the Hebrews, which is expressed in the books most read by the Puritans, the Proverbs and the Psalms, can be felt in their whole attitude toward life. In particular, its rational suppression of the mystical, in fact the whole emotional side of religion, has rightly been attributed by Sanford<sup id="ref_96" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_96">[96]</a></sup> to the influence of the Old Testament. But this Old Testament rationalism was as such essentially of a small bourgeois, traditionalistic type, and was mixed not only with the powerful pathos of the prophets, but also with elements which encouraged the development of a peculiarly emotional type of religion even in the Middle Ages.<sup id="ref_97" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_97">[97]</a></sup> It was thus in the last analysis the peculiar, fundamentally ascetic, character of Calvinism itself which made it select and assimilate those elements of Old Testament religion which suited it best.
</p><p>Now that systematization of ethical conduct which the asceticism of Calvinistic Protestantism had in common with the rational forms of life in the Catholic <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-124" data-page-number="124" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/144" data-page-index="144" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/144"/></span>orders is expressed quite superficially in the way in which the conscientious Puritan continually supervised<sup id="ref_98" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_98">[98]</a></sup> his own state of grace. To be sure, the religious account-books in which sins, temptations, and progress made in grace were entered or tabulated were common to both the most enthusiastic Reformed circles<sup id="ref_99" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_99">[99]</a></sup> and some parts of modern Catholicism (especially in France), above all under the influence of the Jesuits. But in Catholicism it served the purpose of completeness of the confession, or gave the <i>directeur de l'âme</i> a basis for his authoritarian guidance of the Christian (mostly female). The Reformed Christian, however, felt his own pulse with its aid. It is mentioned by all the moralists and theologians, while Benjamin Franklin's tabulated statistical book-keeping on his progress in the different virtues is a classic example.<sup id="ref_100" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_100">[100]</a></sup> On the other hand, the old mediæval (even ancient) idea of God's book-keeping is carried by Bunyan to the characteristically tasteless extreme of comparing the relation of a sinner to his God with that of customer and shopkeeper. One who has once got into debt may well, by the product of all his virtuous acts, succeed in paying off the accumulated interest but never the principal.<sup id="ref_101" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_101">[101]</a></sup>
</p><p>As he observed his own conduct, the later Puritan also observed that of God and saw His finger in all the details of life. And, contrary to the strict doctrine of Calvin, he always knew why God took this or that measure. The process of sanctifying life could thus almost take on the character of a business enterprise.<sup id="ref_102" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_102">[102]</a></sup> A thoroughgoing Christianization of the whole of life was the consequence of this methodical quality of <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-125" data-page-number="125" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/145" data-page-index="145" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/145"/></span>ethical conduct into which Calvinism as distinct from Lutheranism forced men. That this rationality was decisive in its influence on practical life must always be borne in mind in order rightly to understand the influence of Calvinism. On the one hand we can see that it took this element to exercise such an influence at all. But other faiths as well necessarily had a similar influence when their ethical motives were the same in this decisive point, the doctrine of proof.
</p><p>So far we have considered only Calvinism, and have thus assumed the doctrine of predestination as the dogmatic background of the Puritan morality in the sense of methodically rationalized ethical conduct. This could be done because the influence of that dogma in fact extended far beyond the single religious group which held in all respects strictly to Calvinistic principles, the Presbyterians. Not only the Independent Savoy Declaration of 1658, but also the Baptist Confession of Hanserd Knolly of 1689 contained it, and it had a place within Methodism. Although John Wesley, the great organizing genius of the movement, was a believer in the universality of Grace, one of the great agitators of the first generation of Methodists and their most consistent thinker, Whitefield, was an adherent of the doctrine. The same was true of the circle around Lady Huntingdon, which for a time had considerable influence. It was this doctrine in its magnificent consistency which, in the fateful epoch of the seventeenth century, upheld the belief of the militant defenders of the holy life that they were weapons in the hand of God, and executors of His providential will.<sup id="ref_103" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_103">[103]</a></sup> Moreover, it prevented a premature collapse into a purely <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-126" data-page-number="126" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/146" data-page-index="146" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/146"/></span>utilitarian doctrine of good works in this world which would never have been capable of motivating such tremendous sacrifices for non-rational ideal ends.
</p><p>The combination of faith in absolutely valid norms with absolute determinism and the complete transcendentality of God was in its way a product of great genius. At the same time it was, in principle, very much more modern than the milder doctrine, making greater concessions to the feelings which subjected God to the moral law. Above all, we shall see again and again how fundamental is the idea of proof for our problem. Since its practical significance as a psychological basis for rational morality could be studied in such purity in the doctrine of predestination, it was best to start there with the doctrine in its most consistent form. But it forms a recurring framework for the connection between faith and conduct in the denominations to be studied below. Within the Protestant movement the consequences which it inevitably had for the ascetic tendencies of the conduct of its first adherents form in principle the strongest antithesis to the relative moral helplessness of Lutheranism. The Lutheran <i>gratia amissibilis</i>, which could always be regained through penitent contrition evidently, in itself, contained no sanction for what is for us the most important result of ascetic Protestantism, a systematic rational ordering of the moral life as a whole.<sup id="ref_104" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_104">[104]</a></sup> The Lutheran faith thus left the spontaneous vitality of impulsive action and naïve emotion more nearly unchanged. The motive to constant self-control and thus to a deliberate regulation of one's own life, which the gloomy doctrine of Calvinism gave, was lacking. A <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-127" data-page-number="127" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/147" data-page-index="147" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/147"/></span>religious genius like Luther could live in this atmosphere of openness and freedom without difficulty and, so long as his enthusiasm was powerful enough, without danger of falling back into the <i>status naturalis</i>. That simple, sensitive, and peculiarly emotional form of piety, which is the ornament of many of the highest types of Lutherans, like their free and spontaneous morality, finds few parallels in genuine Puritanism, but many more in the mild Anglicanism of such men as Hooker, Chillingsworth, etc. But for the everyday Lutheran, even the able one, nothing was more certain than that he was only temporarily, as long as the single confession or sermon affected him, raised above the <i>status naturalis</i>.
</p><p>There was a great difference which was very striking to contemporaries between the moral standards of the courts of Reformed and of Lutheran princes, the latter often being degraded by drunkenness and vulgarity.<sup id="ref_105" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_105">[105]</a></sup> Moreover, the helplessness of the Lutheran clergy, with their emphasis on faith alone, against the ascetic Baptist movement, is well known. The typical German quality often called good nature (<i>Gemütlichkeit</i>) or naturalness contrasts strongly, even in the facial expressions of people, with the effects of that thorough destruction of the spontaneity of the <i>status naturalis</i> in the Anglo-American atmosphere, which Germans are accustomed to judge unfavourably as narrowness, unfreeness, and inner constraint. But the differences of conduct, which are very striking, have clearly originated in the lesser degree of ascetic penetration of life in Lutheranism as distinguished from Calvinism. The antipathy of every spontaneous child of nature to <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-128" data-page-number="128" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/148" data-page-index="148" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/148"/></span>everything ascetic is expressed in those feelings. The fact is that Lutheranism, on account of its doctrine of grace, lacked a psychological sanction of systematic conduct to compel the methodical rationalization of life.
</p><p>This sanction, which conditions the ascetic character of religion, could doubtless in itself have been furnished by various different religious motives, as we shall soon see. The Calvinistic doctrine of predestination was only one of several possibilities. But nevertheless we have become convinced that in its way it had not only a quite unique consistency, but that its psychological effect was extraordinarily powerful.<sup id="ref_106" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_106">[106]</a></sup> In comparison with it the non-Calvinistic ascetic movements, considered purely from the view-point of the religious motivation of asceticism, form an attenuation of the inner consistency and power of Calvinism.
</p><p>But even in the actual historical development the situation was, for the most part, such that the Calvinistic form of asceticism was either imitated by the other ascetic movements or used as a source of inspiration or of comparison in the development of their divergent principles. Where, in spite of a different doctrinal basis, similar ascetic features have appeared, this has generally been the result of Church organization. Of this we shall come to speak in another connection.<sup id="ref_107" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_107">[107]</a></sup>
</p>
<div class="wst-center tiInherit">
<p><span class="smallcaps" style="font-variant:small-caps;">B. Pietism</span>
</p>
</div>
<p>Historically the doctrine of predestination is also the starting-point of the ascetic movement usually known as Pietism. In so far as the movement remained within the Reformed Church, it is almost impossible to draw <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-129" data-page-number="129" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/149" data-page-index="149" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/149"/></span>the line between Pietistic and non-Pietistic Calvinists.<sup id="ref_108" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_108">[108]</a></sup> Almost all the leading representatives of Puritanism are sometimes classed among the Pietists. It is even quite legitimate to look upon the whole connection between predestination and the doctrine of proof, with its fundamental interest in the attainment of the <i>certitudo salutis</i> as discussed above, as in itself a Pietistic development of Calvin's original doctrines. The occurrence of ascetic revivals within the Reformed Church was, especially in Holland, regularly accompanied by a regeneration of the doctrine of predestination which had been temporarily forgotten or not strictly held to. Hence for England it is not customary to use the term Pietism at all.<sup id="ref_109" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_109">[109]</a></sup>
</p><p>But even the Continental (Dutch and Lower Rhenish) Pietism in the Reformed Church was, at least fundamentally, just as much a simple intensification of the Reformed asceticism as, for instance, the doctrines of Bailey. The emphasis was placed so strongly on the <i>praxis pietatis</i> that doctrinal orthodoxy was pushed into the background; at times, in fact, it seemed quite a matter of indifference. Those predestined for grace could occasionally be subject to dogmatic error as well as to other sins and experience showed that often those Christians who were quite uninstructed in the theology of the schools exhibited the fruits of faith most clearly, while on the other hand it became evident that mere knowledge of theology by no means guaranteed the proof of faith through conduct.<sup id="ref_110" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_110">[110]</a></sup>
</p><p>Thus election could not be proved by theological learning at all.<sup id="ref_111" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_111">[111]</a></sup> Hence Pietism, with a deep distrust of the Church of the theologians,<sup id="ref_112" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_112">[112]</a></sup> to which—this is <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-130" data-page-number="130" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/150" data-page-index="150" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/150"/></span>characteristic of it—it still belonged officially, began to gather the adherents of the <i>praxis pietatis</i> in conventicles removed from the world.<sup id="ref_113" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_113">[113]</a></sup> It wished to make the invisible Church of the elect visible on this earth. Without going so far as to form a separate sect, its members attempted to live, in this community, a life freed from all the temptations of the world and in all its details dictated by God's will, and thus to be made certain of their own rebirth by external signs manifested in their daily conduct. Thus the <i>ecclesiola</i> of the true converts—this was common to all genuinely Pietistic groups—wished, by means of intensified asceticism, to enjoy the blissfulness of community with God in this life.
</p><p>Now this latter tendency had something closely related to the Lutheran <i>unio mystica</i>, and very often led to a greater emphasis on the emotional side of religion than was acceptable to orthodox Calvinism. In fact this may, from our view-point, be said to be the decisive characteristic of the Pietism which developed within the Reformed Church. For this element of emotion, which was originally quite foreign to Calvinism, but on the other hand related to certain mediæval forms of religion, led religion in practice to strive for the enjoyment of salvation in this world rather than to engage in the ascetic struggle for certainty about the future world. Moreover, the emotion was capable of such intensity, that religion took on a positively hysterical character, resulting in the alternation which is familiar from examples without number and neuropathologically understandable, of half-conscious states of religious ecstasy with periods of nervous exhaustion, which were felt as abandonment by God. The effect <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-131" data-page-number="131" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/151" data-page-index="151" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/151"/></span>was the direct opposite of the strict and temperate discipline under which men were placed by the systematic life of holiness of the Puritan. It meant a weakening of the inhibitions which protected the rational personality of the Calvinist from his passions.<sup id="ref_114" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_114">[114]</a></sup> Similarly it was possible for the Calvinistic idea of the depravity of the flesh, taken emotionally, for instance in the form of the so-called worm-feeling, to lead to a deadening of enterprise in worldly activity.<sup id="ref_115" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_115">[115]</a></sup> Even the doctrine of predestination could lead to fatalism if, contrary to the predominant tendencies of rational Calvinism, it were made the object of emotional contemplation.<sup id="ref_116" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_116">[116]</a></sup> Finally, the desire to separate the elect from the world could, with a strong emotional intensity, lead to a sort of monastic community life of half-communistic character, as the history of Pietism, even within the Reformed Church, has shown again and again.<sup id="ref_117" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_117">[117]</a></sup>
</p><p>But so long as this extreme effect, conditioned by this emphasis on emotion, did not appear, as long as Reformed Pietism strove to make sure of salvation within the everyday routine of life in a worldly calling, the practical effect of Pietistic principles was an even stricter ascetic control of conduct in the calling, which provided a still more solid religious basis for the ethic of the calling, than the mere worldly respectability of the normal Reformed Christian, which was felt by the superior Pietist to be a second-rate Christianity. The religious aristocracy of the elect, which developed in every form of Calvinistic asceticism, the more seriously it was taken, the more surely, was then organized, in Holland, on a voluntary basis in the form of conven<span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-132" data-page-number="132" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/152" data-page-index="152" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/152"/></span>ticles within the Church. In English Puritanism, on the other hand, it led partly to a virtual differentiation between active and passive Christians within the Church organization, and partly, as has been shown above, to the formation of sects.
</p><p>On the other hand, the development of German Pietism from a Lutheran basis, with which the names of Spener, Francke, and Zinzendorf are connected, led away from the doctrine of predestination. But at the same time it was by no means outside the body of ideas of which that dogma formed the logical climax, as is especially attested by Spener's own account of the influence which English and Dutch Pietism had upon him, and is shown by the fact that Bailey was read in his first conventicles.<sup id="ref_118" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_118">[118]</a></sup>
</p><p>From our special point of view, at any rate, Pietism meant simply the penetration of methodically controlled and supervised, thus of ascetic, conduct into the non-Calvinistic denominations.<sup id="ref_119" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_119">[119]</a></sup> But Lutheranism necessarily felt this rational asceticism to be a foreign element, and the lack of consistency in German Pietistic doctrines was the result of the difficulties growing out of that fact. As a dogmatic basis of systematic religious conduct Spener combines Lutheran ideas with the specifically Calvinistic doctrine of good works as such which are undertaken with the "intention of doing honour to God".<sup id="ref_120" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_120">[120]</a></sup> He also has a faith, suggestive of Calvinism, in the possibility of the elect attaining a relative degree of Christian perfection.<sup id="ref_121" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_121">[121]</a></sup> But the theory lacked consistency. Spener, who was strongly influenced by the mystics,<sup id="ref_122" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_122">[122]</a></sup> attempted, in a rather uncertain but essentially Lutheran manner, rather to <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-133" data-page-number="133" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/153" data-page-index="153" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/153"/></span>describe the systematic type of Christian conduct which was essential to even his form of Pietism than to justify it. He did not derive the <i>certitudo salutis</i> from sanctification; instead of the idea of proof, he adopted Luther's somewhat loose connection between faith and works, which has been discussed above.<sup id="ref_123" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_123">[123]</a></sup>
</p><p>But again and again, in so far as the rational and ascetic element of Pietism outweighed the emotional, the ideas essential to our thesis maintained their place. These were: (1) that the methodical development of one's own state of grace to a higher and higher degree of certainty and perfection in terms of the law was a sign of grace<sup id="ref_124" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_124">[124]</a></sup>; and (2) that "God's Providence works through those in such a state of perfection", i.e. in that He gives them His signs if they wait patiently and deliberate methodically.<sup id="ref_125" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_125">[125]</a></sup> Labour in a calling was also the ascetic activity <i>par excellence</i> for A. H. Francke<sup id="ref_126" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_126">[126]</a></sup>; that God Himself blessed His chosen ones through the success of their labours was as undeniable to him as we shall find it to have been to the Puritans.
</p><p>And as a substitute for the double decree Pietism. worked out ideas which, in a way essentially similar to Calvinism, though milder, established an aristocracy of the elect<sup id="ref_127" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_127">[127]</a></sup> resting on God's especial grace, with all the psychological results pointed out above. Among them belongs, for instance, the so-called doctrine of Terminism,<sup id="ref_128" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_128">[128]</a></sup> which was generally (though unjustly) attributed to Pietism by its opponents. It assumes that grace is offered to all men, but for everyone either once at a definite moment in his life or at some moment for the last time.<sup id="ref_129" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_129">[129]</a></sup> Anyone who let that moment pass was beyond the help of the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-134" data-page-number="134" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/154" data-page-index="154" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/154"/></span>universality of grace; he was in the same situation as those neglected by God in the Calvinistic doctrine. Quite close to this theory was the idea which Francke took from his personal experience, and which was very widespread in Pietism, one may even say predominant, that grace could only become effective under certain unique and peculiar circumstances, namely, after previous repentance.<sup id="ref_130" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_130">[130]</a></sup> Since, according to Pietist doctrine, not everyone was capable of such experiences, those who, in spite of the use of the ascetic methods recommended by the Pietists to bring it about, did not attain it, remained in the eyes of the regenerate a sort of passive Christian. On the other hand, by the creation of a method to induce repentance even the attainment of divine grace became in effect an object of rational human activity.
</p><p>Moreover, the antagonism to the private confessional, which, though not shared by all—for instance, not by Francke—was characteristic of many Pietists, especially, as the repeated questions in Spener show, of Pietist pastors, resulted from this aristocracy of grace. This antagonism helped to weaken its ties with Lutheranism. The visible effects on conduct of grace gained through repentance formed a necessary criterion for admission to absolution; hence it was impossible to let <i>contritio</i> alone suffice.<sup id="ref_131" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_131">[131]</a></sup>
</p><p>Zinzendorf's conception of his own religious position, even though it vacillated in the face of attacks from orthodoxy, tended generally toward the instrumental idea. Beyond that, however, the doctrinal standpoint of this remarkable religious dilettante, as Ritschl calls him, is scarcely capable of clear formula<span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-135" data-page-number="135" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/155" data-page-index="155" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/155"/></span>tion in the points of importance for us.<sup id="ref_132" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_132">[132]</a></sup> He repeatedly designated himself a representative of Pauline-Lutheran Christianity; hence he opposed the Pietistic type associated with Jansen with its adherence to the law. But the Brotherhood itself in practice upheld, as early as its Protocol of August 12, 1729, a standpoint which in many respects closely resembled that of the Calvinistic aristocracy of the elect.<sup id="ref_133" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_133">[133]</a></sup> And in spite of his repeated avowals of Lutheranism,<sup id="ref_134" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_134">[134]</a></sup> he permitted and encouraged it. The famous stand of attributing the Old Testament to Christ, taken on November 12, 1741, was the outward expression of somewhat the same attitude. However, of the three branches of the Brotherhood, both the Calvinistic and the Moravian accepted the Reformed ethics in essentials from the beginning. And even Zinzendorf followed the Puritans in expressing to John Wesley the opinion that even though a man himself could not, others could know his state of grace by his conduct.<sup id="ref_135" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_135">[135]</a></sup>
</p><p>But on the other hand, in the peculiar piety of Herrnhut, the emotional element held a very prominent place. In particular Zinzendorf himself continually attempted to counteract the tendency to ascetic sanctification in the Puritan sense<sup id="ref_136" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_136">[136]</a></sup> and to turn the interpretation of good works in a Lutheran direction.<sup id="ref_137" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_137">[137]</a></sup> Also under the influence of the repudiation of conventicles and the retention of the confession, there developed an essentially Lutheran dependence on the sacraments. Moreover, Zinzendorf's peculiar principle that the childlikeness of religious feeling was a sign of its genuineness, as well as the use of the lot as a means of revealing God's will, strongly counteracted the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-136" data-page-number="136" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/156" data-page-index="156" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/156"/></span>influence of rationality in conduct. On the whole, within the sphere of influence of the Count,<sup id="ref_138" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_138">[138]</a></sup> the anti-rational, emotional elements predominated much more in the religion of the Herrnhuters than elsewhere in Pietism.<sup id="ref_139" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_139">[139]</a></sup> The connection between morality and the forgiveness of sins in Spangenberg's <i>Idea fides fratrum</i> is as loose<sup id="ref_140" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_140">[140]</a></sup> as in Lutheranism generally. Zinzendorf's repudiation of the Methodist pursuit of perfection is part, here as everywhere, of his fundamentally eudæmonistic ideal of having men experience eternal bliss (he calls it happiness) emotionally in the present,<sup id="ref_141" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_141">[141]</a></sup> instead of encouraging them by rational labour to make sure of it in the next world.<sup id="ref_142" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_142">[142]</a></sup>
</p><p>Nevertheless, the idea that the most important value of the Brotherhood as contrasted with other Churches lay in an active Christian life, in missionary, and, which was brought into connection with it, in professional work in a calling,<sup id="ref_143" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_143">[143]</a></sup> remained a vital force with them. In addition, the practical rationalization of life from the standpoint of utility was very essential to Zinzendorf's philosophy.<sup id="ref_144" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_144">[144]</a></sup> It was derived for him, as for other Pietists, on the one hand from his decided dislike of philosophical speculation as dangerous to faith, and his corresponding preference for empirical knowledge <sup id="ref_145" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_145">[145]</a></sup>; on the other hand, from the shrewd common sense of the professional missionary. The Brotherhood was, as a great mission centre, at the same time a business enterprise. Thus it led its members into the paths of worldly asceticism, which everywhere first seeks for tasks and then carries them out carefully and systematically. However, the glorification of the apostolic poverty, of the disciples<sup id="ref_146" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_146">[146]</a></sup> chosen by God <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-137" data-page-number="137" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/157" data-page-index="157" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/157"/></span>through predestination, which was derived from the example of the apostles as missionaries, formed another obstacle. It meant in effect a partial revival of the <i>consilia evangelica</i>. The development of a rational economic ethic similar to the Calvinistic was certainly retarded by these factors, even though, as the development of the Baptist movement shows, it was not impossible, but on the contrary subjectively strongly encouraged by the idea of work solely for the sake of the calling.
</p><p>All in all, when we consider German Pietism from the point of view important for us, we must admit a vacillation and uncertainty in the religious basis of its asceticism which makes it definitely weaker than the iron consistency of Calvinism, and which is partly the result of Lutheran influences and partly of its emotional character. To be sure, it is very one-sided to make this emotional element the distinguishing characteristic of Pietism as opposed to Lutheranism.<sup id="ref_147" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_147">[147]</a></sup> But compared to Calvinism, the rationalization of life was necessarily less intense because the pressure of occupation with a state of grace which had continually to be proved, and which was concerned for the future in eternity, was diverted to the present emotional state. The place of the self-confidence which the elect sought to attain, and continually to renew in restless and successful work at his calling, was taken by an attitude of humility and abnegation.<sup id="ref_148" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_148">[148]</a></sup> This in turn was partly the result of emotional stimulus directed solely toward spiritual experience; partly of the Lutheran institution of the confession, which, though it was often looked upon with serious doubts by Pietism, was still generally <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-138" data-page-number="138" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/158" data-page-index="158" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/158"/></span>tolerated.<sup id="ref_149" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_149">[149]</a></sup> All this shows the influence of the peculiarly Lutheran conception of salvation by the forgiveness of sins and not by practical sanctification. In place of the systematic rational struggle to attain and retain certain knowledge of future (otherworldly) salvation comes here the need to feel reconciliation and community with God now. Thus the tendency of the pursuit of present enjoyment to hinder the rational organization of economic life, depending as it does on provision for the future, has in a certain sense a parallel in the field of religious life.
</p><p>Evidently, then, the orientation of religious needs to present emotional satisfaction could not develop so powerful a motive to rationalize worldly activity, as the need of the Calvinistic elect for proof with their exclusive preoccupation with the beyond. On the other hand, it was considerably more favourable to the methodical penetration of conduct with religion than the traditionalistic faith of the orthodox Lutheran, bound as it was to the Word and the sacraments. On the whole Pietism from Francke and Spener to Zinzendorf tended toward increasing emphasis on the emotional side. But this was not in any sense the expression of an immanent law of development. The differences resulted from differences of the religious (and social) environments from which the leaders came. We cannot enter into that here, nor can we discuss how the peculiarities of German Pietism have affected its social and geographical extension.<sup id="ref_150" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_150">[150]</a></sup> We must again remind ourselves that this emotional Pietism of course shades off into the way of life of the Puritan elect by quite gradual stages. If we can, at <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-139" data-page-number="139" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/159" data-page-index="159" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/159"/></span>least provisionally, point out any practical consequence of the difference, we may say that the virtues favoured by Pietism were more those on the one hand of the faithful official, clerk, labourer, or domestic worker,<sup id="ref_151" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_151">[151]</a></sup> and on the other of the predominantly patriarchal employer with a pious condescension (in Zinzendorf's manner). Calvinism, in comparison, appears to be more closely related to the hard legalism and the active enterprise of bourgeois-capitalistic entrepreneurs.<sup id="ref_152" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_152">[152]</a></sup> Finally, the purely emotional form of Pietism is, as Ritschl<sup id="ref_153" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_153">[153]</a></sup> has pointed out, a religious dilettantism for the leisure classes. However far this characterization falls short of being exhaustive, it helps to explain certain differences in the character (including the economic character) of peoples which have been under the influence of one or the other of these two ascetic movements.
</p>
<div class="wst-center tiInherit">
<p><span class="smallcaps" style="font-variant:small-caps;">C. Methodism</span>
</p>
</div>
<p>The combination of an emotional but still ascetic type of religion with increasing indifference to or repudiation of the dogmatic basis of Calvinistic asceticism is characteristic also of the Anglo-American movement corresponding to Continental Pietism, namely Methodism.<sup id="ref_154" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_154">[154]</a></sup> The name in itself shows what impressed contemporaries as characteristic of its adherents: the methodical, systematic nature of conduct for the purpose of attaining the <i>certitudo salutis</i>. This was from the beginning the centre of religious aspiration for this movement also, and remained so. In spite of all the differences, the undoubted relationship to <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-140" data-page-number="140" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/160" data-page-index="160" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/160"/></span>certain branches of German Pietism<sup id="ref_155" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_155">[155]</a></sup> is shown above all by the fact that the method was used primarily to bring about the emotional act of conversion. And the emphasis on feeling, in John Wesley awakened by Moravian and Lutheran influences, led Methodism, which from the beginning saw its mission among the masses, to take on a strongly emotional character, especially in America. The attainment of repentance under certain circumstances involved an emotional struggle of such intensity as to lead to the most terrible ecstasies, which in America often took place in a public meeting. This formed the basis of a belief in the undeserved possession of divine grace and at the same time of an immediate consciousness of justification and forgiveness.
</p><p>Now this emotional religion entered into a peculiar alliance, containing no small inherent difficulties, with the ascetic ethics which had for good and all been stamped with rationality by Puritanism. For one thing, unlike Calvinism, which held everything emotional to be illusory, the only sure basis for the <i>certitudo salutis</i> was in principle held to be a pure feeling of absolute certainty of forgiveness, derived immediately from the testimony of the spirit, the coming of which could be definitely placed to the hour. Added to this is Wesley's doctrine of sanctification which, though a decided departure from the orthodox doctrine, is a logical development of it. According to it, one reborn in this manner can, by virtue of the divine grace already working in him, even in this life attain sanctification, the consciousness of perfection in the sense of freedom from sin, by a second, generally separate and <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-141" data-page-number="141" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/161" data-page-index="161" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/161"/></span>often sudden spiritual transformation. However difficult of attainment this end is, generally not till toward the end of one's life, it must inevitably be sought, because it finally guarantees the <i>certitudo salutis</i> and substitutes a serene confidence for the sullen worry of the Calvinist.<sup id="ref_156" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_156">[156]</a></sup> And it distinguishes the true convert in his own eyes and those of others by the fact that sin at least no longer has power over him.
</p><p>In spite of the great significance of self-evident feeling, righteous conduct according to the law was thus naturally also adhered to. Whenever Wesley attacked the emphasis on works of his time, it was only to revive the old Puritan doctrine that works are not the cause, but only the means of knowing one's state of grace, and even this only when they are performed solely for the glory of God. Righteous conduct alone did not suffice, as he had found out for himself. The feeling of grace was necessary in addition. He himself sometimes described works as a condition of grace, and in the Declaration of August 9, 1771,<sup id="ref_157" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_157">[157]</a></sup> he emphasized that he who performed no good works was not a true believer. In fact, the Methodists have always maintained that they did not differ from the Established Church in doctrine, but only in religious practice. This emphasis on the fruits of belief was mostly justified by 1 John iii, 9; conduct is taken as a clear sign of rebirth. 
</p><p>But in spite of all that there were difficulties.<sup id="ref_158" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_158">[158]</a></sup> For those Methodists who were adherents of the doctrine of predestination, to think of the <i>certitudo salutis</i> as appearing in the immediate feeling<sup id="ref_159" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_159">[159]</a></sup> of grace and perfection instead of the consciousness of grace which grew out of ascetic conduct in continual proof of faith—<span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-142" data-page-number="142" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/162" data-page-index="162" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/162"/></span>since then the certainty of the <i>perservantia</i> depended only on the single act of repentance—meant one of two things. For weak natures there was a fatalistic interpretation of Christian freedom, and with it the breakdown of methodical conduct; or, where this path was rejected, the self-confidence of the righteous man<sup id="ref_160" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_160">[160]</a></sup> reached untold heights, an emotional intensification of the Puritan type. In the face of the attacks of opponents, the attempt was made to meet these consequences. On the one hand by increased emphasis on the normative authority of the Bible and the indispensability of proof<sup id="ref_161" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_161">[161]</a></sup>; on the other by, in effect, strengthening Wesley's anti-Calvinistic faction within the movement with its doctrine that grace could be lost. The strong Lutheran influences to which Wesley was exposed<sup id="ref_162" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_162">[162]</a></sup> through the Moravians strengthened this tendency and increased the uncertainty of the religious basis of the Methodist ethics.<sup id="ref_163" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_163">[163]</a></sup> In the end only the concept of regeneration, an emotional certainty of salvation as the immediate result of faith, was definitely maintained as the indispensable foundation of grace; and with it sanctification, resulting in (at least virtual) freedom from the power of sin, as the consequent proof of grace. The significance of external means of grace, especially the sacraments, was correspondingly diminished. In any case, the general awakening which followed Methodism everywhere, for example in New England, meant a victory for the doctrine of grace and election.<sup id="ref_164" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_164">[164]</a></sup>
</p><p>Thus from our view-point the Methodist ethic appears to rest on a foundation of uncertainty similar to Pietism. But the aspiration to the higher life, the second blessedness, served it as a sort of makeshift for the doctrine <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-143" data-page-number="143" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/163" data-page-index="163" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/163"/></span>of predestination. Moreover, being English in origin, its ethical practice was closely related to that of English Puritanism, the revival of which it aspired to be.
</p><p>The emotional act of conversion was methodically induced. And after it was attained there did not follow a pious enjoyment of community with God, after the manner of the emotional Pietism of Zinzendorf, but the emotion, once awakened, was directed into a rational struggle for perfection. Hence the emotional character of its faith did not lead to a spiritualized religion of feeling like German Pietism. It has already been shown by Schneckenburger that this fact was connected with the less intensive development of the sense of sin (partly directly on account of the emotional experience of conversion), and this has remained an accepted point in the discussion of Methodism. The fundamentally Calvinistic character of its religious feeling here remained decisive. The emotional excitement took the form of enthusiasm which was only occasionally, but then powerfully stirred, but which by no means destroyed the otherwise rational character of conduct.<sup id="ref_165" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_165">[165]</a></sup> The regeneration of Methodism thus created only a supplement to the pure doctrine of works, a religious basis for ascetic conduct after the doctrine of predestination had been given up. The signs given by conduct which formed an indispensable means of ascertaining true conversion, even its condition as Wesley occasionally says, were in fact just the same as those of Calvinism. As a late product<sup id="ref_166" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_166">[166]</a></sup> we can, in the following discussion, generally neglect Methodism, as it added nothing new to the development<sup id="ref_167" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_167">[167]</a></sup> of the idea of calling.
</p>
<div class="__nop wst-nop"/>
 <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-144" data-page-number="144" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/164" data-page-index="164" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/164"/></span><div class="wst-center tiInherit">
<p><span class="smallcaps" style="font-variant:small-caps;">D. The Baptist Sects</span>
</p>
</div>
<p>The Pietism of the Continent of Europe and the Methodism of the Anglo-Saxon peoples are, considered both in their content of ideas and their historical significance, secondary movements.<sup id="ref_168" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_168">[168]</a></sup> On the other hand, we find a second independent source of Protestant asceticism besides Calvinism in the Baptist movement and the sects<sup id="ref_169" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_169">[169]</a></sup> which, in the course of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, came directly from it or adopted its forms of religious thought, the Baptists, Mennonites, and, above all, the Quakers.<sup id="ref_170" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_170">[170]</a></sup> With them we approach religious groups whose ethics rest upon a basis differing in principle from the Calvinistic doctrine. The following sketch, which only emphasizes what is important for us, can give no true impression of the diversity of this movement. Again we lay the principal emphasis on the development in the older capitalistic countries.
</p><p>The feature of all these communities, which is both historically and in principle most important, but whose influence on the development of culture can only be made quite clear in a somewhat different connection, is something with which we are already familiar, the believer's Church.<sup id="ref_171" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_171">[171]</a></sup> This means that the religious community, the visible Church in the language of the Reformation Churches,<sup id="ref_172" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_172">[172]</a></sup> was no longer looked upon as a sort of trust foundation for supernatural ends, an institution, necessarily including both the just and the unjust, whether for increasing the glory of God (Calvinistic) or as a medium for bringing the means of salvation to men (Catholic and Lutheran), but <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-145" data-page-number="145" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/165" data-page-index="165" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/165"/></span>solely as a community of personal believers of the reborn, and only these. In other words, not as a Church but as a sect.<sup id="ref_173" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_173">[173]</a></sup> This is all that the principle, in itself purely external, that only adults who have personally gained their own faith should be baptized, is meant to symbolize.<sup id="ref_174" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_174">[174]</a></sup> The justification through this faith was for the Baptists, as they have insistently repeated in all religious discussions, radically different from the idea of work in the world in the service of Christ, such as dominated the orthodox dogma of the older Protestantism.<sup id="ref_175" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_175">[175]</a></sup> It consisted rather in taking spiritual possession of His gift of salvation. But this occurred through individual revelation, by the working of the Divine Spirit in the individual, and only in that way. It was offered to everyone, and it sufficed to wait for the Spirit, and not to resist its coming by a sinful attachment to the world. The significance of faith in the sense of knowledge of the doctrines of the Church, but also in that of a repentant search for divine grace, was consequently quite minimized, and there took place, naturally with great modifications, a renaissance of Early Christian pneumatic doctrines. For instance, the sect to which Menno Simons in his <i>Fondamentboek</i> (1539) gave the first reasonably consistent doctrine, wished, like the other Baptist sects, to be the true blameless Church of Christ; like the apostolic community, consisting entirely of those personally awakened and called by God. Those who have been born again, and they alone, are brethren of Christ, because they, like Him, have been created in spirit directly by God.<sup id="ref_176" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_176">[176]</a></sup> A strict avoidance of the world, in the sense of all not strictly necessary intercourse with <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-146" data-page-number="146" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/166" data-page-index="166" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/166"/></span>worldly people, together with the strictest bibliocracy in the sense of taking the life of the first generations of Christians as a model, were the results for the first Baptist communities, and this principle of avoidance of the world never quite disappeared so long as the old spirit remained alive.<sup id="ref_177" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_177">[177]</a></sup>
</p><p>As a permanent possession, the Baptist sects retained from these dominating motives of their early period a principle with which, on a somewhat different foundation, we have already become acquainted in Calvinism, and the fundamental importance of which will again and again come out. They absolutely repudiated all idolatry of the flesh, as a detraction from the reverence due to God alone.<sup id="ref_178" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_178">[178]</a></sup> The Biblical way of life was conceived by the first Swiss and South German Baptists with a radicalism similar to that of the young St. Francis, as a sharp break with all the enjoyment of life, a life modelled directly on that of the Apostles. And, in truth, the life of many of the earlier Baptists is reminiscent of that of St. Giles. But this strict observation of Biblical precepts<sup id="ref_179" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_179">[179]</a></sup> was not on very secure foundations in its connection with the pneumatic character of the faith. What God had revealed to the prophets and apostles was not all that He could and would reveal. On the contrary, the continued life of the Word, not as a written document, but as the force of the Holy Spirit working in daily life, which speaks directly to any individual who is willing to hear, was the sole characteristic of the true Church. That, as Schwenkfeld taught as against Luther and later Fox against the Presbyterians, was the testimony of the early Christian communities. From this idea of the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-147" data-page-number="147" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/167" data-page-index="167" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/167"/></span>continuance of revelation developed the well-known doctrine, later consistently worked out by the Quakers, of the (in the last analysis decisive) significance of the inner testimony of the Spirit in reason and conscience. This did away, not with the authority, but with the sole authority, of the Bible, and started a development which in the end radically eliminated all that remained of the doctrine of salvation through the Church; for the Quakers even with Baptism and the Communion.<sup id="ref_180" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_180">[180]</a></sup>
</p><p>The Baptist denominations along with the predestinationists, especially the strict Calvinists, carried out the most radical devaluation of all sacraments as means to salvation, and thus accomplished the religious rationalization of the world in its most extreme form. Only the inner light of continual revelation could enable one truly to understand even the Biblical revelations of God.<sup id="ref_181" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_181">[181]</a></sup> On the other hand, at least according to the Quaker doctrine which here drew the logical conclusion, its effects could be extended to people who had never known revelation in its Biblical form. The proposition <i>extra ecclesiam nulla salus</i> held only for this <i>in</i>visible Church of those illuminated by the Spirit. Without the inner light, the natural man, even the man guided by natural reason,<sup id="ref_182" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_182">[182]</a></sup> remained purely a creature of the flesh, whose godlessness was condemned by the Baptists, including the Quakers, almost even more harshly than by the Calvinists. On the other hand, the new birth caused by the Spirit, if we wait for it and open our hearts to it, may, since it is divinely caused, lead to a state of such complete conquest of the power of sin,<sup id="ref_183" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_183">[183]</a></sup> that relapses, to say nothing of the loss of the state of grace, become <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-148" data-page-number="148" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/168" data-page-index="168" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/168"/></span>practically impossible. However, as in Methodism at a later time, the attainment of that state was not thought of as the rule, but rather the degree of perfection of the individual was subject to development.
</p><p>But all Baptist communities desired to be pure Churches in the sense of the blameless conduct of their members. A sincere repudiation of the world and its interests, and unconditional submission to God as speaking through the conscience, were the only unchallengeable signs of true rebirth, and a corresponding type of conduct was thus indispensable to salvation. And hence the gift of God's grace could not be earned, but only one who followed the dictates of his conscience could be justified in considering himself reborn. Good works in this sense were a <i>causa sine qua non</i>. As we see, this last reasoning of Barclay, to whose exposition we have adhered, was again the equivalent in practice of the Calvinistic doctrine, and was certainly developed under the influence of the Calvinistic asceticism, which surrounded the Baptist sects in England and the Netherlands. George Fox devoted the whole of his early missionary activity to the preaching of its earnest and sincere adoption.
</p><p>But, since predestination was rejected, the peculiarly rational character of Baptist morality rested psychologically above all on the idea of expectant waiting for the Spirit to descend, which even to-day is characteristic of the Quaker meeting, and is well analysed by Barclay. The purpose of this silent waiting is to overcome everything impulsive and irrational, the passions and subjective interests of the natural man. He must be stilled in order to create that deep repose of the <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-149" data-page-number="149" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/169" data-page-index="169" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/169"/></span>soul in which alone the word of God can be heard. Of course, this waiting might result in hysterical conditions, prophecy, and, as long as eschatological hopes survived, under certain circumstances even in an outbreak of chiliastic enthusiasm, as is possible in all similar types of religion. That actually happened in the movement which went to pieces in Münster.
</p><p>But in so far as Baptism affected the normal workaday world, the idea that God only speaks when the flesh is silent evidently meant an incentive to the deliberate weighing of courses of action and their careful justification in terms of the individual conscience.<sup id="ref_184" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_184">[184]</a></sup> The later Baptist communities, most particularly the Quakers, adopted this quiet, moderate, eminently conscientious character of conduct. The radical elimination of magic from the world allowed no other psychological course than the practice of worldly asceticism. Since these communities would have nothing to do with the political powers and their doings, the external result also was the penetration of life in the calling with these ascetic virtues. The leaders of the earliest Baptist movement were ruthlessly radical in their rejection of worldliness. But naturally, even in the first generation, the strictly apostolic way of life was not maintained as absolutely essential to the proof of rebirth for everyone. Well-to-do bourgeois there were, even in this generation and even before Menno, who definitely defended the practical worldly virtues and the system of private property; the strict morality of the Baptists had turned in practice into the path prepared by the Calvinistic ethic.<sup id="ref_185" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_185">[185]</a></sup> This was simply because the road to the otherworldly monastic <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-150" data-page-number="150" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/170" data-page-index="170" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/170"/></span>form of asceticism had been closed as unbiblical and savouring of salvation by works since Luther, whom the Baptists also followed in this respect.
</p><p>Nevertheless, apart from the half-communistic communities of the early period, one Baptist sect, the so-called Dunckards (<i>Tunker, dompelaers</i>), has to this day maintained its condemnation of education and of every form of possession beyond that indispensable to life. And even Barclay looks upon the obligation to one's calling not in Calvinistic or even Lutheran terms, but rather Thomistically, as <i>naturali ratione</i>, the necessary consequence of the believers having to live in the world.<sup id="ref_186" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_186">[186]</a></sup>
</p><p>This attitude meant a weakening of the Calvinistic conception of the calling similar to those of Spener and the German Pietists. But, on the other hand, the intensity of interest in economic occupations was considerably increased by various factors at work in the Baptist sects. In the first place, by the refusal to accept office in the service of the State, which originated as a religious duty following from the repudiation of everything worldly. After its abandonment in principle it still remained, at least for the Mennonites and Quakers, effective in practice, because the strict refusal to bear arms or to take oaths formed a sufficient disqualification for office. Hand in hand with it in all Baptists' denominations went an invincible antagonism to any sort of aristocratic way of life. Partly, as with the Calvinists, it was a consequence of the prohibition of all idolatry of the flesh, partly a result of the aforementioned unpolitical or even anti-political principles. The whole shrewd and conscientious rationality of <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-151" data-page-number="151" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/171" data-page-index="171" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/171"/></span>Baptist conduct was thus forced into non-political callings.
</p><p>At the same time, the immense importance which was attributed by the Baptist doctrine of salvation to the rôle of the conscience as the revelation of God to the individual gave their conduct in worldly callings a character which was of the greatest significance for the development of the spirit of capitalism. We shall have to postpone its consideration until later, and it can then be studied only in so far as this is possible without entering into the whole political and social ethics of Protestant asceticism. But, to anticipate this much, we have already called attention to that most important principle of the capitalistic ethic which is generally formulated "honesty is the best policy".<sup id="ref_187" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_187">[187]</a></sup> Its classical document is the tract of Franklin quoted above. And even in the judgment of the seventeenth century the specific form of the worldly asceticism of the Baptists, especially the Quakers, lay in the practical adoption of this maxim.<sup id="ref_188" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_188">[188]</a></sup> On the other hand, we shall expect to find that the influence of Calvinism was exerted more in the direction of the liberation of energy for private acquisition. For in spite of all the formal legalism of the elect, Goethe's remark in fact applied often enough to the Calvinist: "The man of action is always ruthless; no one has a conscience but an observer."<sup id="ref_189" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_189">[189]</a></sup>
</p><p>A further important element which promoted the intensity of the worldly asceticism of the Baptist denominations can in its full significance also be considered only in another connection. Nevertheless, we may anticipate a few remarks on it to justify the order of presentation we have chosen. We have quite <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-152" data-page-number="152" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/172" data-page-index="172" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/172"/></span>deliberately not taken as a starting-point the objective social institutions of the older Protestant Churches, and their ethical influences, especially not the very important Church discipline. We have preferred rather to take the results which subjective adoption of an ascetic faith might have had in the conduct of the individual. This was not only because this side of the thing has previously received far less attention than the other, but also because the effect of Church discipline was by no means always a similar one. On the contrary, the ecclesiastical supervision of the life of the individual, which, as it was practised in the Calvinistic State Churches, almost amounted to an inquisition, might even retard that liberation of individual powers which was conditioned by the rational ascetic pursuit of salvation, and in some cases actually did so.
</p><p>The mercantilistic regulations of the State might develop industries, but not, or certainly not alone, the spirit of capitalism; where they assumed a despotic, authoritarian character, they to a large extent directly hindered it. Thus a similar effect might well have resulted from ecclesiastical regimentation when it became excessively despotic. It enforced a particular type of external conformity, but in some cases weakened the subjective motives of rational conduct. Any discussion of this point<sup id="ref_190" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_190">[190]</a></sup> must take account of the great difference between the results of the authoritarian moral discipline of the Established Churches and the corresponding discipline in the sects which rested on voluntary submission. That the Baptist movement everywhere and in principle founded sects and not Churches was certainly as favourable to the intensity <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-153" data-page-number="153" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/173" data-page-index="173" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/173"/></span>of their asceticism as was the case, to differing degrees, with those Calvinistic, Methodist, and Pietist communities which were driven by their situations into the formation of voluntary groups.<sup id="ref_191" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_191">[191]</a></sup>
</p><p>It is our next task to follow out the results of the Puritan idea of the calling in the business world, now that the above sketch has attempted to show its religious foundations. With all the differences of detail and emphasis which these different ascetic movements show in the aspects with which we have been concerned, much the same characteristics are present and important in all of them.<sup id="ref_192" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_192">[192]</a></sup> But for our purposes the decisive point was, to recapitulate, the conception of the state of religious grace, common to all the denominations, as a status which marks off its possessor from the degradation of the flesh, from the world.<sup id="ref_193" class="plainlinks wst-ref"><a href="#endnote_193">[193]</a></sup>
</p><p>On the other hand, though the means by which it was attained differed for different doctrines, it could not be guaranteed by any magical sacraments, by relief in the confession, nor by individual good works. That was only possible by proof in a specific type of conduct unmistakably different from the way of life of the natural man. From that followed for the individual an incentive methodically to supervise his own state of grace in his own conduct, and thus to penetrate it with asceticism. But, as we have seen, this ascetic conduct meant a rational planning of the whole of one's life in accordance with God's will. And this asceticism was no longer an <i>opus supererogationis</i>, but something which could be required of everyone who would be certain of salvation. The religious life of the saints, as distinguished from the natural life, was—the most <span><span class="pagenum ws-pagenum" id="id-154" data-page-number="154" data-page-name="Page:The Protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism.djvu/174" data-page-index="174" data-page-quality="3" title="Page:The_Protestant_ethic_and_the_spirit_of_capitalism.djvu/174"/></span>important point—no longer lived outside the world in monastic communities, but within the world and its institutions. This rationalization of conduct within this world, but for the sake of the world beyond, was the consequence of the concept of calling of ascetic Protestantism.
</p><p>Christian asceticism, at first fleeing from the world into solitude, had already ruled the world which it had renounced from the monastery and through the Church. But it had, on the whole, left the naturally spontaneous character of daily life in the world untouched. Now it strode into the market-place of life, slammed the door of the monastery behind it, and undertook to penetrate just that daily routine of life with its methodicalness, to fashion it into a life in the world, but neither of nor for this world. With what result, we shall try to make clear in the following discussion.
</p>
<div class="__nop wst-nop"/>

</div>
<hr class="wst-rule wst-rule-center " style="color:inherit;" about="#mwt6"/><span about="#mwt8">
</span><div class="prp-pages-output" about="#mwt8"><div class="reflist wst-smallrefs  " style="  ">
<ol class="mw-references references" typeof="mw:Extension/references" about="#mwt10"/>
</div>
</div></section></body></html>
